

Mary S Clark in the 1940 United States Federal Census

Name: Mary S Clark 

Age: 59 Estimated 

Year: 

abt

 1881 Gender: 

Female Race: White 

Birthplace: Virginia Marital Status: 

Married Relation to Head of House: Wife 

Home in 1940: South River, Rockbridge, Virginia 

Map of Home in 1940: South River, Rockbridge, Virginia Street: Road 603 

Inferred Residence in 1935: South River, Rockbridge, Virginia 

Residence in 1935: South River 

Sheet Number: 7B 

Attended School or College: No Highest 

Grade Completed: Elementary school, 3rd grade 

Weeks Worked in 1939: 0 

Income: 0 

Income Other Sources: No Neighbors: View others on page Household Members 

Age Relationship Joseph A Clark 70 

Head Mary S Clark 59 

Wife Elijah A Clark 28 Son 

Mark J Clark 25 Son 

Paul C Clark 22 Son 

Silas H Clark 18 Son 

Beulah J Clark 15 Daughter

Mary S Clark in the 1930 United States Federal Census

Name: Mary S Clark 

Birth Year: 

abt

 1880 

Gender: Female 

Race: White 

Age in 1930: 50 

Birthplace: Virginia 

Marital Status: Married 

Relation to Head of House: Wife 

Homemaker?: Yes 

Home in 1930: South River, Rockbridge, Virginia, USA 

Map of Home: South River, Rockbridge, Virginia 

Dwelling Number: 233 

Family Number: 249 

Age at First Marriage: 28 

Attended School: No 

Able to Read and Write: Yes 

Father's Birthplace: Virginia 

Mother's Birthplace: Virginia 

Able to Speak English: Yes 

Household Members Age Relationship:

Joseph A Clark 60 Head 

Mary S Clark 50 Wife 

Fannie B Clark 23 Daughter 

Levi C Clark 19 Son 

Elijah A Clark 17 Son 

Mark H Clark 15 Son 

Paul C Clark 12 Son 

Silas H Clark 8 Son 

Beulah J Clark 5 Daughter

Mary S Clark in the 1920 United States Federal Census

Name: Mary S Clark 

Age: 38 

Birth Year: 

abt

 1882 

Birthplace: Virginia 

Home in 1920: South River, Rockbridge, Virginia 

Residence Date: 1920 

Race: White 

Gender: Female Relation to 

Head of House: Wife 

Marital Status: Married 

Spouse's Name: Joseph A Clark 

Father's Birthplace: Virginia 

Mother's Birthplace: Virginia 

Able to Speak English: Yes 

Able to read: Yes 

Able to Write: Yes 

Neighbors: View others on page Household 

Members Age Relationship 

Joseph A Clark 50 Head 

Mary S Clark 38 Wife 

Walter L Clark 21 Son

 James W Clark 16 Son 

Francis B Clark 14 Daughter 

Levi C Clark 11 Son 

Eligha

 A Clark 8 Son 

Mark H Clark 6 Son 

Paul C Clark 2 Son

Family History of William and Mary Read

Family history of William and Mary Read 

Written May 1978 by someone unnamed 

William and Mary Marlow Read of 

Grendon

, Buckinghamshire, England came to the U.S. with eight of their eleven children in a sailing vessel requiring six weeks for the crossing. A family member states they were, for a time, off course. Another recounts a fire breaking out on the ship enroute. Mary was very seasick during the entire crossing. Arrived in the U.S.A. May 1852. 

No record was made of their landing until their arrival at the Ann Arbor railway station, where they were met by a bachelor cousin, John Lowe, who had previously come to America. The family record then states William Read set out to find work and a place to live, leaving mother and children at the railway depot. It is assumed that the cousin also went with him. Before nightfall he had returned with an ox team, taking them to a farm he had found in Pittsfield Township, Washtenaw County. This farm site is presently the Ann Arbor Airport. Three more children were born to them during their stay on this rented farm. Also, their second son Joseph had become a casualty of the Civil War. He died in Nashville, Tenn., Dec. 22, 1862. His war letters, carefully kept in a blue denim bag with a drawstring, were not cherished by a later family member and were not kept after his mother’s death. 

On June 19, 1863, William Read purchased his Green Oak farm with its Greek Revival-style home and moved his family there is 1864. 

Alonzo 

Olds

, an early immigrant from New York State, came to Michigan in 1833. In 1835 he purchased land in Green Oak, Section 26, where he later built his Greek Revival home and had increased the size of his farm to 440 acres by 1850. In 1851 he sold this farm with its temple-type residence to Warren Clark, while he moved on to build up another estate in Section 11. 

Clark owned the farm for nine years, reselling it to Justus Nixon. When William Read purchased the farm in 1863, it consisted of only 240 acres. 

Here the Reads raised their family and spent their remaining years, striving always to keep the home lovely, even enhancing its beauty with flowers, shrubs and various varieties of pines and evergreens, which were planted after they came. 

All of their sons were avid sportsmen, making good use of the woods and lakes surrounding the back of their farm. Thirty- to forty-foot fish nets set across their channels afforded a plentiful supply of Cisco or white fish for these hearty young men, not to mention the huge pike and bass that churned up these lake’s silvery waters. 

Six of the nine boys became farmers, three remaining in Green Oak. John, the eldest, farmed in Bath, Michigan. George returned to farming in Pittsfield Township from whence they came. William purchased a farm north at Manton, Michigan. Edward established a produce business at the railroad terminal at Woodbridge and Woodward in Detroit. Thomas found Read’s Coal and Fee Co. in 1885 at Pinckney, Mich., later adding a lumber business, continuing in the Read family. Jacob’s farm was less than one mile north of his parents’ home. Richard started farming on 

Dixboro

 Road north west of South Lyon in 1880. Two of his three children were born there in a log house. Elise, the daughter, claimed she at least had something in common with Pres. Lincoln. 

Sarah, the older daughter, married, spending her lifetime in the Highland area. Mary Anna married a New Yorker and went to that state to live. Albert, the youngest, remained on the parental farm with his mother after his father’s death in 1888. Eventually, he purchased the farm from the other heirs after the mother’s demise in 1900. 

The three Green Oak farmers, Jacob, Richard and Albert, at one time shipped produce, mainly apples and potatoes, in barrels from South Lyon to their brother Edward’s produce market near the Detroit River. 

Recently found in the Read’s Centennial Farm shop were their Read Bros. copper shipping tag stencils along with those for seventeen varieties of apples and potatoes, most of which are unheard of today: Jersey Spitz, Rambo, 

Swaar

, 

Rox

 Russet, 

Belmnot

, Seek No Farther, Queen, to name a few. 

Bessie Read, a 94-year-old resident of Green Oak, youngest daughter of Jacob Read, tells of her father taking her sister Viola and her to visit his brother Edward’s place of business and seeing Detroit’s horse-drawn trolley cars and taking a boat ride on the Detroit River. 

In later years Bessie became a school teacher, teaching in both the Washburn and Hammond schools of Green Oak and for three years in Cass City, Tuscola County. For many years Bessie remained with her widowed mother, joined later by her older sister Genevieve upon her retirement from the nursing profession. Genevieve Read, third child of Jacob Read, also a lifelong resident of the township and a graduate of Homeopathic School of Nursing in 1906 and later its revered Director of Nursing School. Some very prominent Ann Arbor doctors learned under her tutorship. She was a registered nurse for seventeen years and had served as Superintendent of Nurses at Homeopathic Hospital, Ann Arbor, Mich. She passed away at her old home on Rushton Road at the age of 86. Their older brother, Clyde, lived in Detroit and for many years did the bookkeeping for his Uncle Edward’s produce business. 

Ray, the younger brother, went to Detroit for a time where he started with a partner building automobiles designated at Read 30 around 1913. The car was an undistinguished, inexpensive, $850 five-seater touring car with a gray body and black striping, powered by a four cylindered 33-litre engine. The venture failed and he returned to a farm on Peer Road in Green Oak where he lived until failing health persuaded both him and his wife to retire to South Lyon. The lives of two other daughters of Jacob Read were shortened by death. 

Albert, the last and youngest son of William and Mary Read, married the daughter of pioneer neighbors Alonzo and Susan Borden, who had emigrated to Green Oak from Rochford, Ill. The families were very close as neighbors as well as relatives. Tragedy struck both families when death took both Albert’s young wife, Carrie, and infant daughter in March 1891. These lines were found added to her obituary. 

“There fell upon the house a sudden gloom, 

A shadow on those features fair and 

thim

 [sic] 

And softly from that hushed and darkened room 

Two angels issued where but one went in. A. B.” 

Later Albert married Carrie’s younger sister Addie. To this union were born two children, Editha Addie and Albert W. Read, Jr. 

Albert continued to farm the place that had been home to him since he was six years old. Soon after his mother’s death in 1900, Albert purchased the home farm from the other heirs. On January 3, 1924, his family and neighbors were shocked by his sudden death of pneumonia. 

His son, Albert Jr., took over the responsibility of the farm for his mother. Harriet Driver and Albert Read Jr. were united in marriage on June 4 of that same year, making their home with his mother and sister. Four years later they built and moved into a small home across the road. Their three children—Loren, Leslie, and Lois— were born while living there. Albert continued working the farm for his mother. His sister, Editha Addie Read, married Roy Franklin Dean and moved to Brighton, later back to South Lyon. 

The Read colonial Ionic-columned home was cited for this architecture by the Historic American Building Survey in 1936. Photographed, blueprinted, and recorded in the Library of Congress in Washington D.C., certificates were awarded only to those whose homes were measured for blueprinting. There are about fifty such home in Michigan that were recorded. 

On her wedding anniversary April 13, 1938, Addie Read succumbed to the illness from which she had suffered fifteen long weeks and had brought her son Albert’s family back into her home to care for her. He then purchased his sister’s share of the farm. 

Then with two young potential farmer sons, Loren and Leslie, Albert Read on April 6, 1947, purchased from the heirs the pioneer farm of his maternal grandparents, Alonzo and Susannah Borden. 

In August 1963, 116 Read family relatives gathered at the old William Read home in celebration of the Reads Centennial year and making Albert Read then the owner for a time of two Centennial Farms. On May 5, 1972, the Read home was placed on the National Register of Historic Places. 

This old home with its graceful columns has provided the wedding setting for a Read bride of three generations: Mary Anna Read (Jones), Feb. 28, 1877; Lois A. Read (Smith) July 18, 1953; and Catherine Marie Read (

Tatro

), May 21, 1977. A wedding reception for Leslie M. Read and his bride, Lois J. Pichler, was held June 6, 1954. 

Farm life had taken the Albert Reads down many paths and ways during the fifty years they shared. From the old-time traditional farming with horses and antiquated tools, a few cows, hogs, sheep, a few turkeys and hens, and a dying cherry orchard to an enlargement of most of these things. Then to a customer-door-trade for garden produce, dressed broilers, eggs, milk, and cream, plus other orchard fruit and berries. Later on to an expanded dairy business with the two sons. 

Meanwhile Harriet had become almost sole tender of a boat livery for nearly fifteen years on the north shore of Lime Kiln Lake, though but few local people know of its existence. Read’s Boat Livery was a well-known place to many Detroiters and most of its suburbs. Due to her ill health, it was eventually closed. Never once during this more than half a century did Albert Read II consider giving up farming as a way of life, despite all odds, striving to the very end. Both he and wife Harriet had started to Maumee, Ohio, to purchase a field sprayer when signs of impending trouble caused him to turn back. Forty-eight hours later Death had laid her icy hand upon him on June 26, 1975. 

His son, Loren, had not finished his Read’s Centennial Farm Store when his father’s death occurred. Creeping urbanization had prompted his son Leslie to purchase a farm in Michigan’s Thumb Area a year earlier. Today, May 1978, Read’s Farm as it has been quite widely known for many years no longer exists as a farm. 

She inspired me to love scripture reading – Fanny Rogers Bull

Every time we stayed with 

DaDa

 and 

MaMa

 between Daddy’s duty stations, I saw her read from her Bible every afternoon. After her daily household tasks were finished, she would sit in her chair and take the Bible from its place on the small end table and read. 

MaMa

 and 

DaDa

 gave my sister and me Bibles for Christmas 1961. I still have it and cherish it sixty years later. When I was in sixth grade, I started my habit of reading the Bible every day. When I was almost 17 (in 1972), I was thrilled to include the Book of Mormon, Doctrine and Covenants, and Pearl of Great Price in my daily study. My love for the scriptures began in the late 1950s because I saw my faithful grandmother read her Bible.

	Monacan Indian Nation

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Jump to 

navigationJump

 to search

Not to be confused with the people of Monaco.

Monacan

Total population

Enrolled members 2000

Regions with significant populations

Virginia, West Virginia, Maryland, Ohio

Languages

English, formerly 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tutelo_language" \o "Tutelo language" Tutelo

Related ethnic groups

Tutelo

, Occaneechi, Manahoac, other eastern Siouan tribes

The Monacan Indian Nation is one of eleven Native American tribes recognized since the late 20th century by the U.S. state of Virginia. In January 2018, the United States Congress passed an act to provide federal recognition as tribes to the Monacan and five other tribes in Virginia. They had earlier been so disrupted by land loss, warfare, intermarriage, and discrimination that the main society believed they no longer were "Indians". However, the Monacan reorganized and asserted their culture.[1]

In the 21st century, the Monacan nation is located primarily in their traditional territory of Virginia's Piedmont region, particularly in Amherst County near Lynchburg. As of 2018 the Monacan Indian Nation has approximately 2,000 members.[2] There are satellite groups in West Virginia, Maryland, Tennessee, and Ohio.

The Monacan nation was first recorded by Jamestown settlers in colonial Virginia. Their native language is a Siouan language which is extinct.[3] The people are related to other Siouan-speaking tribes of the inland in this region, such as the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tutelo" \o "Tutelo" Tutelo

, Saponi and Occaneechi.

Contents

117th century

2Origins and legends of modern tribe

3Claims and recognition as Native American

4Celebration

5References

6Further reading

7External links

17th century

Historical marker near the site of the Monacan village of 

Monasukapanough

 in northern Albemarle County, Virginia.

When Jamestown settlers first explored the James River in May 1607, they learned that the James River Monacan (along with their northern 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mannahoac" \o "Mannahoac" Mannahoac

 allies on the Rappahannock River) controlled the area of the Piedmont between the Fall Line (where present-day Richmond developed) and the Blue Ridge Mountains. The Monacan were hostile competitors with the Powhatan confederacy, a group of thirty Algonquian-speaking tribes who controlled much of the Tidewater and coastal plain. The 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weroance" \o "Weroance" weroance

 

Parahunt

, son of paramount chief Powhatan of the Powhatan confederacy, persuaded Captain Christopher Newport not to venture beyond the James River falls into Monacan country.

However, the determined Newport made an expedition into Monacan country the following year in November 1608. On a 40-mile (64 km) march, the settlers found two Monacan towns, whose names they recorded as 

Massinacak

 and 

Mowhemenchough

. Unlike the Powhatan, who had given the settlers lavish welcomes, the Monacan largely ignored them and went about their business. The settlers captured their chief and forced him to guide them around his territory. On November 26, 1608, Peter Wynne, a member of Newport's party to the Monacan villages, wrote a letter to John Egerton informing him that some members of the party believed the pronunciation of the Monacans' language resembled "Welch" (Welsh), which Wynne spoke. Newport had asked Wynne to act as interpreter,[4] but the language was not Welsh and he could not understand it.

Mowhemencho

, the Monacan nation's easternmost outpost, was between Bernard's Creek and Jones Creek in the eastern tip of present-day Powhatan County. 

Massinacak

 (

Mahock

) was at the mouth of Mohawk Creek, a mile south of present-day Goochland. The Monacan capital was 

Rassawek

, located at the point within the two branches, Point of Fork, of the upper James and Rivanna rivers. Tributary to them were the 

Monahassanugh

 (later known as the 

Nahyssan

, i.e. 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tutelo" \o "Tutelo" Tutelo

), whose town was near what later developed as 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wingina,_Virginia" \o "Wingina, Virginia" Wingina

, and the 

Monasukapanough

 (later known as the Saponi), living near present-day Charlottesville.[citation needed] All these groups were closely related with the Siouan Manahoac to the north.[citation needed]

In 1656 several hundred 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nahyssan" \o "Nahyssan" Nahyssan

, 

Mahock

, and 

Rechahecrians

 (possibly Iroquoian-speaking Erie from present-day Pennsylvania) threatened both the Powhatan tribes and the settlers by camping near the James falls. A combined force of the Powhatan and settlers was sent to dislodge them. The Pamunkey chief 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Totopotomoi" \o "Totopotomoi" Totopotomoi

 was slain in the resulting battle. Historically the Monacan and Erie were trade allies, especially copper.

The Monacan towns of 

Mowhemencho

 and 

Mahock

 were still occupied in 1670, when John Lederer and Major Harris recorded visiting them; they found that the men possessed muskets. Lederer recorded their tradition that they had settled in the area on account of an oracle 400 years earlier, having been driven from the northwest by an enemy nation. They told him they had found it occupied by the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doeg_(tribe)" \o "Doeg (tribe)" Doeg

, whom they eventually displaced, in the meantime teaching them the art of growing corn.

He recorded another Monacan tradition as follows: "From four women, viz. Pash, Sepoy, 

Askarin

, and 

Maraskarin

, they derive the race of 

mankinde

; which they therefore divide into four tribes, distinguished under those several names."

At the time of Lederer's visit, the tribe had about 30 bowmen or warriors, out of a total population of perhaps 100. Lederer also noted the towns of 

Sapon

 and 

Pintahae

 on the Staunton River. Batts and 

Fallam

 recorded the latter town as 

Hanahaskie

 in 1671. The 20th-century ethnologist Swanton considers this last to be a 

Nahyssan

 village. Around 1675 the 

Nahyssan

 settled on an island at the confluence of the Stanton and Dan rivers, upriver of the Occaneechi people.

In 1677, the Monacan chief 

Surenough

 was one of several native signatories to the Treaty of Middle Plantation following Bacon's Rebellion. Virginian settlers and the Pamunkey encountered them, and the Manahoac, on the Upper Mattaponi and North Anna rivers in 1684.

By 1699, the Monacan had abandoned their homeland, moving farther away due to European encroachment. The Virginian House of Burgesses granted much of the former site of 

Mowhemencho

 to French Huguenot refugees, who were settled on both sides of the James River in 1700 and 1701. First promised land at Jamestown, they were forced by the Virginian colonial government to settle above the falls. In Goochland County, they established the villages of Manakin and Sabot, today known as Manakin-Sabot, Virginia.

Although a few Monacan lingered in the area as late as 1702, the core remnant seems to have merged with the 

Nahyssan

 and other closely related Virginia Siouan tribes, by then known generally as 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tutelo" \o "Tutelo" Tutelo

-Saponi. Under this collective name, the bulk of the tribe may be traced to North Carolina (1702), and back to Virginia (Fort 

Christanna

, 1714). They headed north to join the Iroquois around the Great Lakes for protection, and were noted in Pennsylvania (Shamokin, by 1740); and in western New York at 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coreorgonel" \o "Coreorgonel" Coreorgonel

 by 1753, where they joined the Cayuga. They participated with them in the American Revolutionary War as allies of the British against the Patriots. After the war, the Monacan went with the Iroquois to Canada. They were settled at the (Six Nation Reserve of the Grand River First Nation) in present-day Ontario. Their settlement of 

Tutelo

 Heights was noted in 1779. By the early 20th century, their descendants in Ontario had been largely absorbed by the Cayuga tribe through intermarriage.

Smaller bands are believed to have split off in North Carolina, and at several locations across Virginia.

Origins and legends of modern tribe

Current headquarters of the Monacan Indian Nation in Amherst, Virginia

After Peter Wynne's expedition of 1608, the Monacan are one of the groups who have been conjectured to be "Welsh Indians"[citation needed]. Historians have found no evidence for that and treat it as myth[citation needed]. The Monacan language was part of the Siouan language family.

In 1831–1833, William Johns, an ancestor of some of today's Monacan, purchased 452 acres (1.83 km2) of land on Bear Mountain for a settlement of families related to him. In 1850, the census recorded 29 families there.[5][6]

Over time, Native Americans in Virginia intermarried with Europeans and African Americans. Whites assumed that meant that they no longer identified as Indians, but were mistaken. In 1924, Virginia passed a Racial Integrity Act, which instituted a binary system of racial classification as black or white only. It also included the one-drop rule, requiring classification as black of a person with any known African ancestry. The director of the department of vital records insisted on reclassifying specific families as black, although they had long been recorded as Indian. This program ignored how people identified socially and culturally, and disrupted decades of records, causing American Indians in Virginia to lose historical continuity. But they kept their culture and community, and reorganized in the 20th century to regain recognition as Native American peoples.

In 1926 Mongrel Virginians: The WIN Tribe, a study of a mixed-race group in the Blue Ridge Mountains, was published by the Carnegie Institution. The author described the group as "degenerate". The author referred to the group as the WIN tribe, for White-Indian-Negro, because he was disguising the name of the group, the surnames of its members, the county which was studied – every fact about them. Some contemporary academic reviewers strongly criticized and ridiculed the book and its reliance on community anecdotes to make judgments about families and individuals.[7]

When ancestors of current Monacan families entered the U.S. military to serve in the world wars, they resisted accepting the classification of "colored", which the state of Virginia had tried impose on them.[6]

In 1946 the researcher William Harlan Gilbert Jr. described the Monacan in his "Memorandum Concerning the Characteristics of the Larger Mixed-Blood Racial Islands of the Eastern United States". Edward T. Price had a study in 1953, "A Geographical Analysis of White-Negro-Indian Racial Mixtures in the Eastern United States ". Both used the former name for the group, "Issues", generally used to refer to free people of color, most of whom were mixed-race, who were free before the Civil War and general emancipation. Both authors considered the Issues (sometimes called "Old Issues") to be tri-racial.

The Episcopal Church ran a primary school (Bear Mountain Indian Mission School) for the children of this community at Bear Mountain near Amherst, Virginia. There was no high school education available. In 1963, Amherst County proposed a $30,000 bond to build a school for the mission community. The proposal was voted down, and 23 students applied for transfer to public schools. The state approved their applications and the mission school closed.

Claims and recognition as Native American

In the early 1980s, Peter Houck, a local physician, published Indian Island in Amherst County, in which he speculated that the free people of color in the region during the antebellum era were in part descendants of the Monacan tribe.[8] While this population had claimed an Indian cultural identity since the turn of the 20th century, Houck was the first to link some of them to the Monacan tribal identity. Prior to Houck's book, most people claiming Native American ancestry in that vicinity had identified as Cherokee, which were well-known in the Southeast. Many of the local families continue to claim Cherokee instead of Monacan ancestry.[9]

In 1988, the Monacan Tribe incorporated as a nonprofit organization to establish its presence. In 1989, the tribe was officially recognized by the State of Virginia. Other tribes recognized by the state include the Chickahominy, Eastern Chickahominy, Mattaponi, Nansemond, Pamunkey, Rappahannock, Upper Mattaponi, 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Patawomeck" \o "Patawomeck" Patawomeck

, Nottoway, and 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cheroenhaka_(Nottoway)" \o "Cheroenhaka (Nottoway)" Cheroenhaka

 (Nottoway) tribes.

On January 30, 2018, federal recognition status was granted to the Monacan Nation and five other tribes in Virginia through passage by Congress of the Thomasina E. Jordan Indian Tribes of Virginia Federal Recognition Act of 2017. President Trump signed the bill approved by both houses of Congress.[10]

Celebration

Today the Monacan Tribe operates a yearly powwow in May, and a homecoming celebration in October. A model of an ancient Monacan village has been constructed as part of Natural Bridge (Virginia) State Park, in nearby Rockbridge County.

References

^ Vincent Schilling, "Six VA Tribes Slotted For Federal Recognition as Senators Warner &amp; Kaine Secure Bill Passage", Indian Country Media Network, January 16, 2018; accessed February 16, 2018

^ "The Monacan Indian Nation". Lynchburg Museum. Retrieved February 19, 2019.

^ 

Kobert

, Linda (June 26, 2007). "ANTHROPOLOGIST KARENNE WOOD RESEARCHES THE LANGUAGE OF HER MONACAN TRIBE". UVA Today. University of Virginia. Retrieved November 8, 2020.

^ Mullaney, Steven The Place of Stager, University of Michigan Press 1995 ISBN 978-0-472-08346-6 p. 163

^ Contemporary Monacans, University of Virginia Archived July 20, 2011, at the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wayback_Machine" \o "Wayback Machine" Wayback

 Machine, accessed May 6, 2008

^ Jump up 

to:a

 b Monacan Indian Nation Archived August 5, 2002, at the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wayback_Machine" \o "Wayback Machine" Wayback

 Machine, accessed May 6, 2008

^ "Review": A.H. Estabrook and Ivan E. 

McDougle

, Mongrel Virginia: The WIN Tribe, in The ANNALS, American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 126, No. 1, 165–166 (1926), accessed April 8, 2010 The reviewer noted the lack of scientific data. He describes the book as "Absolutely unscientific in method; an exposé of small community moral depravity recorded from the lips of neighbors." The reviewer further criticizes the efforts at concealing the identity of the place and people, as nothing can be verified or checked, especially since some accounts are about people who have died. The reviewer noted that from his experience, there was little to differentiate this group culturally from others in the mountains of the region, and he attributed their characteristics more to the culture than to race.

^ Houck, Peter W (September 1993). Indian Island in Amherst County. ISBN 9780963845504. LCCN 84080088.

^ Horace R. Rice, The Buffalo Ridge Cherokee: A Remnant of a Great Nation Divided, Heritage Books, 1995

^ "Trump signs bill giving recognition to 6 Virginia tribes", Associated Press, January 30, 2018

Further reading

Indigenous peoples of the Americas portal

Houck, Peter W. Indian Island in Amherst County. Lynchburg: Lynchburg Historical Research Co., 1984.

Estabrook, Arthur H. &amp; 

McDougle

, Ivan E. Mongrel Virginians: The WIN Tribe. Washington: Carnegie Institution, 1926.

Sir James Stewart of Bute 1st Baron Of 

Ardmaleish

 and Kirkton

1606–1662 • LHP4-ZKW​​

Life Sketch

A descendant of this Sir John Stewart in the seventh generation, Sir James Stuart of Bute, grandfather of the first earl, was created a baronet by King Charles the First, 28th March 1627. He was a firm adherent of that unfortunate monarch, and early in the civil wars garrisoned the castle of Rothesay, and, at his own expense, raised a body of soldiers in the king’s cause. He was appointed by his majesty his lieutenant over the west of Scotland, and directed to take possession of the castle of Dumbarton. Two frigates were sent to his assistance, but one of them was wrecked in a storm, and Sir James was ultimately obliged to retire to Ireland, to avoid imprisonment. His estate was sequestrated, and on recovering possession of it, he was obliged, by way of compromise, to pay a fine of five thousand marks, imposed by parliament in 1646. When Cromwell obtained possession of Scotland, the castle of Rothesay was again taken out of his hands, and a military force placed in it. Sir James was also deprived of his hereditary office of sheriff of Bute, and declared incapable of any public trust. He died at London in 1662, and was buried in Westminster Abbey. By his wife, Isabella, eldest daughter of Sir 

Dugald

 Campbell of 

Auchinbreck

, baronet, he had two sons and three daughters. His eldest son, Sir 

Dugald

 Stuart, succeeded him, and died in 1672, leaving a son, Sir James Stuart, the third baronet of the family, and first earl of Bute.
_________________________________________________

Ninian

 Stewart married three times. In 1539 he was succeeded by his son James Stewart. James suffered during the feud between the Earl of 

Arran

 who was regent of Scotland and the Earl of Lennox. James Stewart was succeeded by his son, John Stewart, who attended the Parliament in Edinburgh as the Commissioner for Bute. The family 

favoured

 the French spelling of the name as Stuart, which was introduced by Mary, Queen of Scots, and is still used by the present Chiefs.

On 28 March 1627 Sir James Stuart of Bute was created 1st Stuart Baronet, of Bute in the Baronetage of Nova Scotia by Charles I of England. During the early part of the Scottish Civil War he garrisoned Rothesay Castle and raised soldiers for the king at his own expense. Stuart was appointed royal lieutenant for the west of Scotland. He decided to take possession of Dumbarton Castle but two frigates that were sent to assist fell 

foul

 of stormy weather, with one being completely wrecked. As a result, Sir James Stuart was forced to flee to Ireland. When Oliver Cromwell was victorious Sir James Stuart was forced to pay a substantial fine to redeem his estates that had been sequestrated.

Sir James Stuart's grandson was another James Stuart, who upon the forfeiture of the Earl of Argyll in 1681, was appointed as Colonel of the local Militia. This James Stuart supported the accession of William of Orange and his wife, Queen Mary Stuart.

Henry 

Hartless

about 1725 – 9 July 1802 • LR1Q-LYR​​

Life Sketch

James 

Hartless

, born say 1758, was one of the freeholders of Amherst County ordered to work on a new road from Irish Creek Gap down the 

Pedlar

 River to Campbell Road on 5 January 1778, listed next to Michael 

Ailstock

. He was in a list of men in Amherst County called into militia service in 1781 [William &amp; Mary Digital Archives, 

Swem

 Library's Special Collections, Cabell Papers Box 2, Folder11.pdf; https://digitalarchive.wm.edu/handle/10288/16244]. On 4 March 1783 the Amherst County court dismissed his suit against Hugh McCabe [Orders 1773-82, 211-2; 1782-4, 84]. He was taxable in Amherst County on 3 horses and 2 cattle in 1782 but not taxable there again until 1800. His estate was taxable on 3 horses in 1805 [PPTL 1782-1803, frames 9, 482; 1804-23, 67]. His estate was inventoried on 16 September 1805 for 71 pounds [WB 4:190]. His administrator paid board and schooling for his sons Richard and Henry 

Hartless

 [WB 5:64; 6:223, 306]. Less

-171450000Cherokee National History         

According to tribal history, Cherokee people have existed since time immemorial. Our oral history extends back through the millennia. It’s recorded that our first European contact came in 1540 with Hernando DeSoto’s exploration of the southeastern portion of our continent. Trade and intermarriage with various European immigrants soon followed, most notably with the English, Scots and Irish. Treaties were made between the British and the Cherokee Nation as early as 1725, with Cherokee Nation being recognized as inherently sovereign through those nation-to-nation agreements. Cherokees took up arms in various sides of conflicts between the European factions, in hopes of staving off further predations of Cherokee land and sovereign rights.

In time, missionaries and European influences created a strong educational and spiritual framework, with many Cherokees becoming Christians and sending their children to missionary schools to be educated in English. By the time gold was discovered in the Cherokee Nation in 1828 near Dahlonega, Georgia, the Cherokee Nation had a written language, a newspaper that published in both Cherokee and English and a Constitutional government. A few Cherokees had even emulated their southern U.S. counterparts by building plantations worked by slaves.

Despite this assimilation, by 1835 a number of treaties with the U.S. had ceded away all but a small area of Cherokee Nation’s once vast lands. Under mounting pressure to give up what land remained, a small group of Cherokee leaders signed the Treaty of New Echota that year, agreeing to relocate the entire Cherokee Nation to western lands where some of the tribe (who became known as Old Settlers) had already moved. Principal Chief John Ross refused to sign the Treaty of New Echota and urged the Cherokee people to stay in their homelands, in hopes he could get the treaty rescinded.

Despite many efforts to defeat the New Echota Treaty, measures to remove Cherokees from their homes and farms got underway in 1838. Cherokees, intermarried whites and even slaves were summarily rounded up and placed into more than a dozen stockades to await their departure. It’s estimated that 16,000 Cherokees eventually were forced to undertake the six to seven month journey to “Indian Territory” in the land beyond Arkansas. Between the stockades, starvation and sickness, and the harsh winter conditions, some 4,000 Cherokees perished, never reaching their new land.

Ever resilient, the Cherokee people rebuilt their lives in Indian Territory, along with other tribes who had also been similarly driven away from the southeast. Cherokee Nation’s government unified the Old Settlers with the Cherokees recently immigrated from the east, ratifying a new Cherokee Nation Constitution on September 6, 1839. A new Supreme Court building quickly followed in 1844, along with the resurgence of the tribe’s newspaper, schools, businesses and other entities. The Cherokee people thrived until the advent of the Civil War once again pulled the tribe apart.

 

Although Cherokee Nation was not technically part of the U.S., it was forced to take sides in the War Between the States. While two-thirds of Cherokee men fought on the side of the Union, another third was actively part of the Confederate effort. When the Union abandoned nearby Ft. Gibson, which had up to then provided some measure of protection from southern troops, Principal Chief Ross felt he had no choice but to sign in support of the Confederacy. Upon the Union victory, Cherokee Nation signed its last treaty with the U.S., the somewhat punitive Treaty of 1866.

Cherokee Nation barely had time to rebuild after the war before another threat loomed—allotment. Cherokees owned their land collectively and the concept of individual land ownership was foreign. By the late 1800s, sentiment in the U.S. turned towards moving Indians to reservations and opening their lands for occupation and westward expansion. The Cherokee Nation had been promised by treaty they would not be bothered in their new home and would never be removed again. Instead, the U.S. chose to create a new state and allot tribes’ land out to individual owners. With Oklahoma statehood in 1907, Cherokees suddenly became land owners and state citizens. Much of the Cherokee Nation’s infrastructure was dissolved, including schools, courts and most of its government.

A dark period of great poverty ensued for many Cherokees, who suddenly had a new government and laws to navigate, as non-Indians quickly acquired former tribal lands. Tribal government trickled but never halted entirely. With the 1960s civil rights movement, a resurgence in tribal efforts took hold. The Principal Chief’s Act of 1970 paved the way for certain tribes including the Cherokee Nation to take back their government and popularly elect tribal officials once again. In 1971, the first Cherokee Nation election in nearly 70 years was held and a new Constitution ratified in 1975.

We have never looked back.

https://www.cherokee.org/about-the- nation/history/#:~:text=According%20to%20tribal%20history%2C%20Cherokee,southeastern%20portion%20of%20our%20continent.

center790575

	

centerbottom00

435292578486000WILLIAM GREEN MOSELEY

10th Great-Grandfather of Andrew Mark Smallwood

M3FN-VLC

Chart #110.8 and #274

Lower Norfolk Co. VA WB C:166

Made 06-29-1655

Received 02-15-1655/6

The last will and 

testamt

 of William Moseley the elder, written with his 

owne

 hand this 29th day of June 1655.

Imprimis I give and bequeath my Soule to God that gave it, and my body to the earth to be decently buried at the discretion of my wife and children. 

 Item I give and bequeath to my 

Cosen

 

Willm

. Cockcroft of 

Cowe

 

Calfe

 of a 

yeare

 olde.  

And to my 

grandchilde

 Corker a Cow 

Calfe

 of a 

yeere

 olde.

Item I give unto my wife Susan 

Moselely

 my gray Mare and furniture, and I doe likewise give her one Negro woman called Mary with her Childe 

Besse

, to be at her 

disposeing

 

duering

 her life.  

Alsoe

 I 

doe

 give to my wife Susan all the 

sheepe

 with the Increase thereof, together with all her wearing apparel, and her Life time upon the 

plantacon

 where she now lives.

Item I give to my 

sonne

 

Willm

. Moseley, eight hundred acres of land 

Lyeing

 and being as expressed in 

Bartho.hodgkin’s

 

Pattent

.  And also I doe give to my said 

sonne

 

Willm

 one Yonge Mare 

foale

 of three 

monethes

 olde to him and his 

heires

 

for ever

.

Item I give and bequeath to my 

sonne

 Arthur Moseley, all that tract of land 

wch

. I bought of George Kempe, and moreover and above that all that land 

wch

. Was surveyed by Mr. 

Empero’r

 when I was in England to him and his 

heires

 

for ever

.

And for the residue of my Estate my debts being all first paid out,  To be equally divided between my wife Susan, William and Arthur Moseley.  Signed by mee

Will:  Moseley, 

Senio’r

, with a Seale.

/w/The 

m’ke

 I.C. of John 

Carrowaye

; The 

m’ke

 H. of Abraham Thomas

THOMAS LEONARD

10th Great-Grandfather of Andrew Mark Smallwood

9JQH-J1C

Chart #125.12 and #321

Whoever his parents are, keep Thomas and his children together.

Thomas Leonard is called "the Immigrant." He was one of the last of the 13 children of Sampson Leonard and Margaret Fiennes, Baroness 

Dacre

, of 

Knol

 in Kent and 

Herstmonceux

 in East Sussex. Being one the last of many children of a titled family didn't stand for much. Thomas is found as a skilled iron worker in Pontypool, Wales. He is a skilled iron worker there. He also married Lydia White there in 1600. Thomas Leonard and his son Henry Leonard, and another son, made the trip to Massachusetts, where all three worked in the colonial iron forges. Lydia died in Pontypool, Wales in 1701.

CHRISTENING: Parish records of 

Sevenoaks

, Kent, England FHL Film #1473690

GENEALOGY: An Account of the Families of Lennard and Barrett

Thomas, 23rd May, 1577
(page 242) I have been unable to discover much about either of Samson's sons 

Thoma

READ THIS BEFORE CHANGING PARENTS
The Thomas Lennard who was the son of Sampson Lennard and Margaret Fiennes, Baroness 

Dacre

 was christened May 23, 1577 in 

Sevenoaks

, Kent, and was buried November 16, 1638. His will appointed his brother-in-law, Sir Francis Barnham, his executor, and left the residue of his property to his godson, Thomas Lennard, who was his grandnephew, being the second son of Richard Lord 

Dacre

.
An ancient copy of this Thomas's will describes him as of '

Eveuns

 Green in the parish of 

Sundrish

 Kent.' He appointed his 'loving brother in law' Sir Francis Barnham his executor, to whom he left a legacy of 2ol, and all the rest
https://www.archive.org/stream/accountoffamilie02barr?ref=ol#page/242/mode/2up
Publication date 1908

“Thomas Barnum, His Ancestors and Descendants,” v. 1:4 July/August 1998 and Thomas Barrett-Lennard, “An Account of the Families of Lennard and Barrett,” compiled largely from original documents, printed for private circulation, 1908, Fiche #6036475 from LDS.

Some have stated that Thomas Leonard was the son of Sampson Leonard and 

Eleanore

 

Cresswell

. Thomas married Lydia White in 1600 in Pontypool, Monmouth, Wales.
Children:
Philip LEONARD
John LEONARD
Henry LEONARD
James LEONARD
William LEONARD
Philip LEONARD
Thomas LEONARD
Margery LEONARD
Joan LEONARD
Sarah LEONARD

THOMAS LEONARD was born 23 May 1577, in Chevening, Kent, England to Sampson Leonard

No:Thomas

 Leonard died 6 Nov 1638 and was buried at 

Hurstmonceaux

 parish. See History of the 

Lennards

 p 242

Thomas Leonard did not come to New England.

PRE-AMERICAN ANCESTRY of our LEONARD IRONWORKERS

On 2 Feb. 1732/3 Hannah (Leonard) Deane, a daughter of James&amp; Mary (Martin) Leonard of Taunton, Mass., dictated to her grand-nephew Zephaniah Leonard an account of the English origin of our 

Leonards

 of ironworking fame (fig. 1).[1]

First, let us summarize what data we have on the pre-American lives of the children of Thomas &amp; Elizabeth (White) Leonard. (Note that I have added to the nine children identified by Hannah Deane, two children who died shortly after birth. Also note that Hannah listed the six sons and three daughters in the same order as determined below):

Child #1: HENRY LEONARD (ca. 1618 – ca. 1695)

The earliest documented records of his presence in America appear in the Salem Quarterly Court Records &amp; Files, 26:4:1649:

“

Wittnesses

 

agt

 Pray strike Pinion &amp; 

Tho

: 

Billington

 &amp; 

Jno

 Dimond, 

Jno

 Vinton, Henry Leonard, Jos 

Jyarks

, 

Nichs

 Pinion, 

Tobiah

 Saunders, 

Jno

 Dimond &amp; his man” fined ten shillings at ye Iron works for a common swearer.

Henry Leonard’s wife and John Vinton’s wife fined for scolding, etc., by the worshipful Capt. Robert Bridges.

Also in the 1649 Saugus Ironworks account book kept by Richard Leader’s clerk, Thaddeus 

Riddan

, Henry Leonard was paid 14 shillings for a hat.

In the “Lynn Iron Works” manuscripts, £13/09/11 was listed “

Soemuch

 being a debt 

deue

 from Hennery 

Leonnard

 

alloued

 him upon arbitration.” It is not clear if this entry was made in 1650 or 1651. (See my companion article, “The Establishment of the Ironworking Industry in America”).

On 27 Oct. 1655 “Henry Leonard of Hammersmith (i.e. Saugus) of the age 37 or thereabouts” made a deposition regarding a heap of spoiled coal at the Braintree Forge about 9 years previous. This would indicate that Henry was born ca. 1618 and that he was in Braintree by 1646. This latter date correlates with the 1645 date for the start of the Braintree ironworks. Note, however, that Lewis &amp; Newhall claim that Henry was in Lynn by 1642 and that the first iron foundry was in successful operation in Lynn (i.e., Saugus) as early as 1643.

See also American s of Royal Descent 1898 by Charles Browning p 41 in Pedigree XI
However, it appears fairly certain that Henry and his brother James were ironworkers at Bilston, Staffordshire, shortly before their emigration (see #2, James Leonard, below).

Child #2: JAMES LEONARD (ca. 1620 – 1691)

The first documented records of his presence in America appear in the “Lynn Iron Works” papers:[8]

To: James 

Leonnarde

 p 15 

dayes

 

Worcke

 about ye 

finnerey

 

Chimneye

, and other 

worcke

 in ye forge £1-13-00

To: ditto 

Leonarde

 p dressing his
bellows, 3 times £1-10-__

To: Ditto. 

Soe

 much 

alloued

 him 

forr

breingeinge

 his goods from 

Prouidence

: £2-00-00.

(See my companion article, “The Establishment of the Ironworking Industry in America”).

It is deduced that these payments were made in 1651. Note that James was paid £2/-/- for bringing his goods from Providence. Does this indicate that James first resided in Roger Williams’ Providence, Rhode Island, with John Throckmorton? On 10 Jan. 1644/5 in Providence 25 acres of land were granted to a number of inhabitants. Signatures of 35 persons by mark or signature, including the mark of a James Leonard, were on the document but James Leonard’s name had been crossed out.

Was it our James Leonard who was one of 14 persons transported to Virginia by Robert Bennet for which Robert obtained a patent for 700 acres on 20 June 1635/18 Apr. 1637? As early as 1623 an ironworks was started in Jamestown Colony but it was destroyed when attacked by Indians. Later attempts were made to reconstruct an iron industry and workers were brought over from England but this attempt failed. G. Marston Leonard posed the question, “Could it be possible that James Leonard was sent over as an ironworker and returned to England, as many did return?” G. Marston goes on to report that Elisha C. Leonard had a note that Susanna Leonard (Nathaniel6, Elkanah5, Elkanah4, Elkanah3, Thomas2, James1) said that the first wife of James was Jennie/Jeannie Martin and that among Virginia patents there is a record of a Huguenot family by the name of Martyn who had a daughter by the name of Jeanne.

According to the Leonard family bible, Thomas Leonard, the eldest son of James, was born 3 Aug. 1641. This date leads us back to Kinver, Staffordshire, where on 8 Aug. 1641 Thomas Leonard, son of James &amp; Jane/Jean Leonard, was baptized. Margaret Martin was wife 1. Jane was wife 2. Margaret was wife 3.

James Leonard, the second child of James, was born ca. 1643. He died 1 Nov. 1726 in his 84th year.[15] Unfortunately no records have been found to indicate where in England this birth occurred.

Probably James and his young family (and his older brother Henry) were ironworkers in the Bilston, Staffordshire, area prior to their emigration. Bilston became a center of the “Black Country” iron industry (fig. 2). Apparently the 

Leonards

 left a claim to the ownership of some heavily mortgaged ironworks there. Caroline Leonard Goodenough wrote that some of them removed to the iron mining district of Wales – later 

Monmouthshire

, England – from whence James &amp; Henry Leonard came, leaving their forges in England “plastered with mortgages” not only at 

Pontipool

 but also at 

Belston

, Stafford County.[16] Years later (ca. 1821?) an ironworker in Bilston by the name of James Leonard sent a letter to “James Leonard iron worker in or near Taunton, Massachusetts, New England,” stating that extensive iron works situated there belonged to the 

Leonards

. Charles Richmond, Esq. of Taunton, investigated the legal situation in Bilston. The outcome was that the New England 

Leonards

 decided not to undertake the expense of an extended suit.[17]

One of the shareholders in John Winthrop’s “Company of Undertakers of the Iron Works in New England” was Thomas Foley (1617 – 1677). He and his brothers were probably the foremost ironmasters in the Black Country at that time, owning iron and mine works as far afield as 

Monmouthshire

.[18] Their father, Richard Foley, started the family fortune with an iron works near 

Stourbridge

 (3 miles E of Kinver). Could he have been involved in the recruitment of the Leonard brothers when Winthrop was having a difficult time conscripting experienced ironworkers?

Child #3: MARGERY LEONARD (1624/5 - ?)

Margery was baptized 13 Mar. 1624/5 in the Parish Church of 

Cleobury

 Mortimer, Shropshire, daughter of forgeman Thomas &amp; Elizabeth Leonard.[19] Here we have the earliest record of a child of Thomas &amp; Elizabeth (White) Leonard.

Cleobury

 Mortimer is a small village on the Rea River about halfway between Kidderminster and Ludlow (fig. 2). An old map (date unknown) shows an Upper Forge and a Lower Forge on the river.

According to Hannah Deane’s account, Margery married Henry Samson, Lt. Gov. (?) of the City of Galway (?), Ireland (fig. 1).

Child #4: MAY/MARY LEONARD (1627 – 1627)

May/Mary was baptized 12 Sep. 1627 in 

Cleobury

 Mortimer, died in 1627. She was a daughter of Thomas Leonard.[20]

Child #5: WILLIAM LEONARD (1628 – 1628)

William was baptized 30 Nov. 1628 in 

Cleobury

 Mortimer, buried there in Nov. 1628. He was the son of Thomas &amp; 

Elizabe

 Less

Vitals

Detail View

Name

  •  11 Sources  • 

EditEdit

 Name

Thomas Leonard

Reason This Information Is 

Correct:Really

 - then why do 4 of the sources spell it Leonard?

Last Changed: October 27, 2021 by S 

Mould

Sex

  •  9 Sources  • 

EditEdit

 Sex

Male

Last Changed: January 28, 2012 by 

MillerLindsayEllen

Birth

  •  6 Sources  • 

EditEdit

 Birth

1578

Kent, England

Last Changed: October 27, 2021 by 

NDWhisenant

ChristeningAdd

Death

  •  2 Sources  • 

EditEdit

 Death

6 November 1638

Taunton, Bristol, Massachusetts Bay Colony, British Colonial America

Last Changed: December 28, 2021 by 

mpkenefick

Burial

  •  1 Source  • 

EditEdit

 Burial

6 November 1638

Raynham, Bristol, Massachusetts, British Colonial America

Reason This Information Is 

Correct:See

 Find A Grave and Life Sketch.

Last Changed: October 20, 2021 by dthompson67

Other Information

Detail 

ViewAdd

 Information

Alternate Name

 • 

EditEdit

 Alternate Name

Also Known As

Thomas Lennard

Last Changed: October 21, 2019 by FernSueNeubert1

Residence

 • 

EditEdit

 Residence

1624

Cleobury

, Mortimer, 

Sheopshire

, England

Birth of Margery

Last Changed: January 20, 2019 by Judy Baugh Freed

Custom Event

 • 

EditEdit

 Custom Event

Arrival

1635

Virginia

Reason This Information Is Correct:?? Not sure he would have landed in Virginia and then traveled to Massachusetts. ??

Last Changed: October 20, 2021 by S 

Mould

Residence

 • 

EditEdit

 Residence

1638

Gwent, Pontypool, 

Monmouthshire

, Wales

Iron Working for Hanbury family, Richard Hanbury, a goldsmith, and nephew, Phillip, ran an ironworks

Last Changed: December 3, 2018 by Amy Sue Connolly

Custom Event

 • 

EditEdit

 Custom Event

5 Children who 

emmigrated

children of Thomas and Elizabeth (White) Leonard are identified. The emigration of five of them to America is established. The five emigrants are: 1. Henry born circa 1618 2. …  More

Last Changed: December 3, 2018 by Amy Sue Connolly

Custom Event

 

• 

EditEdit

 Custom Event

Iron Forger

Thomas was listed as “of the forge, 

fyner

” in that record. A 

fyner

 was one who is charge of the hearth where cast iron was made malleable

Last Changed: August 19, 2020 by 

EvaGiddinge

Affiliation

 • 

EditEdit

 Affiliation

Thomas Leonard is called "the Immigrant." He was one of the last of the 13 children of Sampson Leonard and Margaret Fiennes, Baroness 

Dacre

, of 

Knol

 in Kent and …  More

Last Changed: January 9, 2021 by FackrellRoxie43

Affiliation

 • 

EditEdit

 Affiliation

we know that the parents of Henry, James, Philip, and Thomas were Thomas Leonard and Elizabeth White. We know that Thomas was a skilled forgeman and 

fyner

 and probably trained …  More

Reason This Information Is Correct:https://sites.rootsweb.com/~dearbornboutwell/fam7448.html

Last Changed: January 16, 2021 by FackrellRoxie43

Affiliation

 • 

EditEdit

 Affiliation

According to Hannah Leonard Deane, the father of Thomas Leonard was Henry Leonard. Efforts to find a candidate Henry Leonard have come to naught. There were recorded Henry …  More

Reason This Information Is Correct:https://sites.rootsweb.com/~dearbornboutwell/fam7448.html

Last Changed: January 16, 2021 by FackrellRoxie43

Custom Event

 

• 

EditEdit

 Custom Event

Thomas "Fiennes" Leonard being issue of Margaret Fiennes.

There is little historical evidence of a person "Thomas 'Fiennes' Leonard ever existing and none that Lydia White married the son of Sampson Leonard and Margaret Fiennes

Last Changed: October 20, 2021 by dthompson67

Custom Event

 • 

EditEdit

 Custom Event

Who Is Thomas' Correct Father?

England

Reason This Information Is 

Correct:On

 2 February 1732-3, Hannah Leonard Deane (1660 - 1749) stated, "my great grandfather's name was Henry Leonard" - Genealogical Memoir of the Leonard Family published by …  More

Last Changed: August 18, 2022 by 

426720092773500SAMPSON LEONARD

11th Great-Grandfather of Andrew Mark Smallwood

9CCH-X3X

Chart #321.02

1365885194310000

2219325554418500220980038487350042576756096635004295775342011000"Glorious Sampson Lennard rest of our Lord Jesus Christ's coming here, waiting for the armor-bearer, together with his wife Margaret, my dearest 

Baronissa

 

Dacre

 (sister and heir of Gregory will become the next soldier le Baron 

Dacre

 of the South) to whom 47 years, 4 months, and some days 

supernumerarios

, bound with a chain MATRIMONIAL, sweetly and happily lived out of the same 

suscepitque

 7 children, Henry, Baron 

Dacre

, Gregory, and Thomas survived, all the other four in infancy extinguished, and the five remaining BABY GIRL 6 daughters, one of which perished; piety, the County, hospitality, famous and praise in common good, more majestic than the death of the wife of the king's most noble grace 

anticipante

 forward, and honor the son of the first-born le Baron 

Dacre

 of the South, with the diploma of illustrious King of Jacob, at the age 71, at the beginning of salvation 1615, September. 20. departed from this life."

-- Under the remarkably fine tomb in Chevening Church, upon which are their life-size effigies is the following inscription for Sampson Lennard: Thanks to Dewayne Gore for translating it from Latin to English. At Find a Grave: Sampson “Sheriff of Kent” Lennard
BARON SAMPSON LEONARD OF DACRE was born 10 November 1544, Chevening, 

Sevenoaks

, Kent, England, to John Leonard High Sheriff of Kent (1508-1590) and Elizabeth Harman (1508-1585.) He married (1) Lady Margaret Fiennes, 10 November 1564; (2) *

Eleanore

 

Cresswell

 before 1576, of 

Odinham

, Hampshire, England.
Sampson Leonard died 20 September 115, age 70, Chevening, 

Sevenoaks

, Kent, England. Buried 21 September 1615, St. Botolph’s Churchyard, Chevening, 

Seavenoaks

, Kent, England.

Knole

Knole

, 

Chvening

, Kent, England
Last 

miedieval

 deer 

parl

 left in England, at 

Knole

, birthplace of Sampson Leaonard.

Occupation: Sheriff of Kent 1591.Fthoma
He was 11 Lord 

Dacre

.
Christening
Christening 

Chevenning

, Kent, England
Burial
21 SEP 1615 St. Botolph, Chevening, Kent, England

Sampson was M.P. for Sussex and Sheriff of Kent.

Sampson Leonard died 20 September 1615, Chevening, Kent, England, age 71.

Sampson Lennard, who, in right of his mother, quartered with 

her's

 the arms of 

Annefley

 and 

Chandos

, and was a person of learning and ingenuity. In his youth he went with his countryman, Sir Philip- Sidney, to the wars in the Netherlands, and was with him when he received the wound of which he died. Afterwards he made himself known by several translations from the Latin and French, (particularly Du 

Pleffi

 

Mornay's

 Hist, of Papacy,) and was 

honoured

 by Prince Henry's patronage. He was some time a Member of the college of Arms, and died anno. 1

Knole

 House

Knole

 House was built by Thomas 

Bourchier

, Archbishop of Canterbury, between 1456 and 1486, on the site of an earlier house belonging to James Fiennes, the Lord Say and 

Sele

, who was executed after the victory of Jack Cade's rebels at the Battle of 

Solefields

. On Archbishop 

Bourchier's

 death, the house was bequeathed to the See of Canterbury — Sir Thomas More appeared in revels there at the court of John Morton — and in subsequent years it continued to be enlarged, with the addition of a new entrance tower and large courtyard, now known as Green Court. In 1538 the house was taken from Archbishop Thomas Cranmer by King Henry VIII. In 1566, and during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, it came into the possession of her cousin Thomas Sackville whose descendants, the Earls and Dukes of Dorset and Barons Sackville, lived there since 1603.
The first lease was made on 1 February 1566, between Robert Earl of Leicester and Thomas Rolf. By this lease the manor and mansion-house of 

Knole

, the deer park and also 

Panthurst

 Park and other lands, were demised to the Thomas Rolf for ninety-nine years at a rent of £200 The landlord was to do all repairs, and reserved the very remarkable right to himself and his heirs of occupying the mansion-house as often as he or they chose to do so. This right of occupancy right did not extend to the gate-house, nor to certain other premises. The tenant was given power to alter or rebuild the mansion-house at his pleasure. As 

Mr

 Rolf died very soon after this lease, it was transferred to John Lennard and his son Samson, Lord 

Dacre's

 son-in-law.

Sampson Leonard
Sampson was eldest son of John Leonard of Chevening, near 

Tunbridge

 Wells, born about 1545. Sampson was admitted a member of Lincoln's Inn on 9 May 1564, by 'special admission'. In all the documents he signed "Samson", but in Lord 

Dacre's

 writings, and indeed in almost every reference to him, his name is spelt with a 'p'.
In 1563, the 

Darrells

 approached John Lennard about making a match between Mary and his son, Sampson. Mary Darrell (b. ca. 1545 - d. post 1594) was the daughter of Thomas Darrell of 

Scotney

, Kent and Mary 

Roydon

 (b. ca. 1525 - d. post 1591). Mary seemed agreeable and Lennard approved of her and a pre-contract was arranged. However, Lennard had heard rumors that Mary was to wed someone else. When he questioned the 

Darrells

 about this, they denied it. They admitted that she had another suitor, one 

Barnabe

 

Googe

 of 

Gooche

 (b. 11 Jun 1540 - d. 7 Feb 1593/4), who had been writing poems to her, but insisted that there was no “secret enticement”. The case was submitted to arbitration by Archbishop Parker of Canterbury. He removed Mary from her parents’ house and made her a ward of the court while the matter was decided. To the dismay of both the 

Darrells

 and the 

Lennards

, the archbishop decided in favor of Master 

Googe

, to whom Mary was wed on 5 Feb 1564.

Sampson married Margaret Fiennes, daughter of Lord Thomas Fiennes, 9th Baron 

Dacre

 of the South and his wife, Lady Mary Neville. Camden, in his 'Britannia', speaking of the death of her bother Gregory Fiennes, Lord 

Dacre

, says: 'whose sister &amp; heir Margaret, Sampson Lennard, a person of extraordinary worth &amp; civility, took to wife, and by her hath fair issue'. Lord 

Dacre

 speaks of there being eight children, but the parish registers of Chevening and 

Sevenoaks

 shows there to have been ten baptized in those churches; according to the inscription on Sampson's tomb there were seven sons, of whom Henry, Gregory, and Thomas survived him, and six daughters, of whom five survived.
In the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, Sampson was High Sheriff of Kent from November 1590 to November 1591. He was elected a member of several Parliaments: in 1586 for St. Maws, in 1588 for the borough of Christchurch, Hampshire, in 1592 for St Germans, in 1597 for Rye, in 1601 for Liskeard, and in 1614 for the county of Sussex.
In 1586 he appears to have wished to be elected for Southampton, as among the archives of that borough there is the following letter from a Mr. William Butler to the Mayor of that place:
'Oct 12, 1586. 

Mr

 

Maior

 I have become an earnest 

sutor

 to you to have your 

favour

 &amp; furtherance to make 

choyse

 of a 

Friende

 of mine to be one of your burgesses of your Towne in this parliament. The gentleman is a very sufficient man, and if you make your election of a burgess, that is 

noe

 

Townesman

, you 

can not

 make 

choyse

 of a better, his name is Mr. Sampson 

Leonarde

, dwelling in Kent, but 

yf

 

yt

 please you, &amp; the rest of your aldermen to 

grante

 me my 

sute

, ye shall 

heare

 of him at my house at all times when you shall have cause to use him, who is a very sufficient gentleman in any matter for your Towne, &amp; myself shall 

thinke

 myself greatly beholding to you...'
In 1588, when the Spanish Armada of King Felipe II of Spain was launched against England, Sampson took part in repelling the invader. Among the list of the 'chief captains' in the different counties of the kingdom, Sampson’s name appears in the list for Kent with fifty light horse; and eight years later, when Spain again appeared to be likely to attack England, on 10 November 1596, his name appeared in the very careful preparations made to guard the Medway from foreign aggression.
The following letter from a Mr. Rowland Whyte to Sir Robert Sidney shows that Sampson was active in doing magisterial work in his 

neighbourhood

, and is also somewhat interesting, illustrating as it does the necessity that existed then, as now, for members of Parliament to conciliate their supporters:
'...

Euen

 now Mr. Lovelace of Kent came 

vnto

 me &amp; desired me to procure 

hym

 some answer from your Lordship to a letter he sent you; 

yt

 is about a Colt he says is 

vnduly

 detained from 

hym

 in 

Oteford

 park. His 

sute

 unto you is that you will direct your 

Lettre

 to Sir 

Thos

 

Walsingham

, Sir John 

Lcvison

, 

Mr

 Leonard, 

Mr

 Sidley or any two of them to examine 

thc

 cause. I promised to write 

vnto

 you about 

yt

 for he is one of them that 

gaue

 you his voice in the Election, and I 

haue

 thanked 

hym

 for 

yt

...'
There are in the British Museum two letters from Sampson to a Mr. Hicks; I have not been able to identify the 'most 

vnhappye

 

kynsman

,' on whose behalf the following of these letters was written, which are addressed:
'To the Worshipful my very 

lovyng

 

frend

 

Mr

 Michael 

HicksGood

 

mr

 Hicks I 

vnderstand

 by my brother how much we are all bound 

vnto

 

yov

 for your 

frendship

 in 

procuryng

 the 

reprie

 of my most 

vnhappye

 

kynsman

 for the 

wch

 I most 

heartylye

 thank 

yov

. By a lamentable letter sent 

vnto

 me this 

nyght

 from some sisters of 

myne

 that 

remayne

 

ther

 I am informed that the 

Quene

 hath lately sent 

Mr

 Wade to the 

Kyng

 of 

Portyngall

 to require 

hym

 to leave his 

sute

 for 

Raulins

 (?) and that she is purposed the law shall 

haue

 his course for his execution, 

wch

 if it be true We have small hope our 

kynsman

 

shalbe

 spared, I beseech 

yov

 

affourd

 your best 

helpe

 at this pinche and I shall never 

forgett

 your 

kyndnes

 but ever be redye to requite to the 

vttermost

 of my power. And so 

wt

 my most 

harty

 commendations in hast I leave 

yov

Knoll this 

xvij

 of May 1592.Your very 

lovyng

 

frendSampson

 LENNARD'
In the second letter, also dated from 

Knole

, but some two years later, Sampson expresses a hope that Mr. Hicks '

wyll

 one day 

gett

 

leasure

 to cum 

wt

 your bedfellow to Knoll where you... shall f Less

Vitals

421005092392500LADY MARGARET FIENNES

11th Great-Grandmother of Andrew Mark Smallwood

MQ7H-L68

Chart #321.03

https://www.ancestry.com/family-tree/person/tree/89456971/person/230048108386/facts

"'Margaret 

Fynes

, 

Baronissae

 

Dacre

, Baron 

Dacre

, son of Thomas, Thomas will become a soldier of the Son, the Son of Thomas Lord 

Dacre

, and Anna his wife the daughter of 

Humfridi

 

Bourchier

 Knight, the son of John, Baron of Berners 

Bourchier

, the son of William 

Bourchier

 Earl of Essex and Ewe, and Anna his wife thereof, the daughter of Thomas of Woodstock, Duke of Gloucester and from the mother's side, the stock of the daughter of Mary, the daughter of George 

Nevile

 of 

Bergaveny

 Baron, Son of Edward 

Nevile

, 

Burgaveny

 of the Baron, the son of Ralph 

Nevile

 Earl of Westmorland, the daughter of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster and Joan his wife. Love and honor, therefore, have held most dear, and this same 

moestissimus

 wife, whom when 

beasset

 happy issue, 

exemplarque

 of piety to God, their respect her husband, of charity to the poor, kindness toward all men, sex exhibited above at length by 10 day of March, in the year of salvation 1611, age 70, with the highest of all good men desire them; the Supreme Spirit, the Spirit of the Father gladly 

lubensque

, 

exhalavit

.

-- inscription for Margaret Lennard under the tomb in Chevening Church. Thank you to Dewayne Gore for translating it from Latin to English.
----------------
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Margaret_Fiennes,_11th_Baroness_Dacre
On 10 November 1564 at the age of 23, Margaret married Sampson Lennard (died 1615), who came from a family of landed gentry. They resided at Chevening, Kent. He was a Member of Parliament for various constituencies, and from 1590 to 1591, he held the post of High Sheriff of Kent. Lady 

Dacre

 and her husband had four sons and six daughters:[1] Occurring in 

Sevenoaks

, Kent, England unless otherwise stated:

John Lennard, born 1567; buried 10 Oct 1575.
Sir Henry Lennard, 12th Baron 

Dacre

 (25 March 1570 - 8 August 1616); Born in Chevening, Kent, England; married 

Chrysogona

 Baker, by whom he had issue.[1]
Anne Lennard, born 1 Aug 1572 Chevening, Kent; married Herbert Morley.
Elizabeth Lennard, born 5 Jun 1580; buried 20 Oct 1581.
Elizabeth Lennard, born 26 Nov 1581; married Sir Francis Barnham, by whom she had issue.
Gregory "George" Lennard, born 25 Oct 1573[citation needed] Chevening, Kent; married in 1614 to Maud Llewellyn. Died 1620, without issue.[1]
Mary Lennard, born 22 Oct 1574 Chevening, Kent; married Sir Ralph 

Bosville

.

Thomas Lennard, died 1638 without issue (

d.s.p

).[1]

Margaret Lennard, born 28 Sep 1578; married Sir Thomas Waller, by whom she had issue, including Parliamentarian soldier Sir William Waller.
Frances Lennard, born 28 Jul 1583; married Sir Robert More
John Lennard,[1] born 11 Oct 1584; died bef. 1615.
Baroness 

Dacre

 

382714566675000JOHN LENNARD III

12th Great-Grandfather of Andrew Mark Smallwood

LB7G-19Z

Chart #321.04

44672256250940004429125362204000John Leonard High Sheriff of Kent

John Leonard 1508-1590) &amp; Elizabeth Harmon (1520-1585)
John Leonard was born in 1508 in Of 

Knole

 Near, Chevening, Kent, England. He died on 12 Mar 1590 in 

Chevering

, Kent, England. He was buried on 12 Mar 1590 in St. Botolph, Chevening, Kent, England. He . He was christened in Of, Chevening, Kent, England. Parents: John Lennard and Catherine 

Weston.He

 was married to Elizabeth Harmon about 1538 in 

Knole

, Kent, England.

High Sheriff of Kent, Barrister of Lincoln's Inn

JOHN LEONARD (HIGH SHERIFF OF KENT: BARRISTER OF LINCOLN INN) was born about 1508 of Chevening, Kent, England, to Sir John Lennard (1479-1554)and Katherine Weston (1484-1516.) He married Elizabeth Harmon about 1534 of 

Crayford

, Kent, England..

John Leonard died at age 82,12 March 1590, Chevening, Kent, England. Buried at Saint Botolph’s Church, Chevening, Kent, England.

Biography
John Lennard, as the eldest son, inherited his father's house and lands. He became a prosperous lawyer at Lincoln's Inn. Under Henry VIII he became a justice of the peace, prothonotary (clerk of court) of the common pleas. and was in the commission of the peace. Under Elizabeth I he was custos 

brevium

 (keeper of the writs) of the common pleas, and became sheriff of Kent.
In 1551 he bought the manor of Chevening, and after 1570 he possessed the manor of 

Knole

, in 

Sevenoke

, where he then mostly lived.
He married Elizabeth, daughter of William Harman, of Elham, in 

Crayford

. He died in 1590 and was buried in Chevening under a sumptuous tomb of alabaster, with figures of himself and his wife.
At the time of his death he held the manors of Chevening, 

Chepsted

, 

Appulderfield

, 

Northsted

, and 

Wickhurst

. He left them all to his eldest son, Sampson. His youngest son, Samuel was knighted and settled in West Wickham. He also left five daughters.
Birth
ABT 1508 

Knole

 near Chevening, Kent, England[1]
Christening
Chevening, Kent, England
Marriage
ABT 1538 

Knole

, Kent, England[1]
Wife: Elizabeth Harmon Payne
Children
According to several reliable sources [2][3][4] the children of John Lennard (abt. 1508 – 1590) are:
• Samson
• Benjamin
• Samuel
• Mary(

Walshingham

, Gresham)
• 

Timothea

 (Covert)
• Rachael (Neville)
• Elizabeth (

Eure

)
• Anne (Darrell)
Any additional children shown must either be duplicates, died young, or erroneous.Gunn-471 11:10, 28 June 2017 (EDT)
Death
12 MAR 1589/90[1]
Burial
12 MAR 1590 St. Botolph, Chevening, Kent, England

About John Leonard
Son of John Lennard of Chevening and Catherine Weston. Married Elizabeth Harmon, daughter of William Harmon and Margaret Boteler (Butler). Children: Sampson, Samuel, Mary, Elizabeth, Rachael, Anne, 

Timothea

. Born 1508 and died at age 82 in 1590.
"But to return to John Lennard, the eldest son of John Lennard, of Chevening, and Catharine Weston, his wife, who was born in the last year of King Hen. 

Vllth's

 reign, and Who, after a learned education, applied himself to the study of the law; first, under the direction of his uncle, Mr. Weston, one of the Prothonotaries of the Common Pleas, and afterwards as a student in Lincoln's-Inn, and in 27 Hen. VI. was called to the Bar, and not long after made 

Prothondtary

 of the nine Shires in Wales, and Clerk of the Crown there; and in 37 Hen. VIII. obtained the office of Second Prothonotary of the Common Pleas. King Edw. VI. assigned him a standing fee for his office in North Wales, and enlarged his letters patent for the fame. Queen Mary, in regard of his services, granted him the manor of 

Chepsted

, in Kent; and, in 3 Elizabeth, he purchased, of Lord Hunsdon, a long lease he had under the Crown, of the manor of 

Knol

, about three miles distant from Chevening, where he afterwards, for the pleasantness of the situation, much resided, preferring it to his house at Chevening,. till he gave it up to his eldest son. In 4 Eliz* he was promoted to the office of Custos 

Brevium

 of the Common Pleas, which had been held before him, by diverse persons of great reputation ; particularly by Sir William Cecil, (afterwards Lord Burleigh) whom he succeeded, and was held by the late Earls of Litchfield. In 13 Eliz; he was appointed High Sheriff" of Kent, which office, in those times, was bestowed only on the most considerable Gentlemen in their counties. He married Elizabeth, the daughter of William Harman s, of 

Ellam

, in 

Crayford

 in Kent, a family of good consideration in those parts, who, by his mother, * the daughter of Sir John Butler, of Woodhall, in Hertfordshire, was descended from the ancient Lords of that name, Barons of Wem and 

Overfley

, by which Elizabeth he had two sons, Sampson and Samuel, and five daughters; 1. Mary, wife of Guilford 

Walsingham

, eldest son of Sir Thomas 

Walsingham

, of 

Scadbury

, in Kent, and, after his death, married Sir Thomas 

Grefham

, 

of'Fitzey

, in Surry; 2. Elizabeth, who married Sir Francis 

Eure

, Chief Justice of North Wales, second son of William, Lord 

Eure

; 3. Rachael, wife of Edward, Lord 

Abergavenny

; 4. Anne, married to Sir Marmaduke Darrel, of Fulmer, in Berks, Servant to Queen Elizabeth and King James, to which last he was Cofferer; 5. 

Timothea

, to Sir Walter Covert, of 

Slaugham

, in Sussex. In the execution of his offices; being a person of great integrity and diligence, he was unblameable, tarrying himself most uprightly; and there are still remaining in the family some copies of letters which he had occasion to write to the great men in office in his time, which, by the nervousness of the stile, and closeness of the reasoning, shew how able he was, though written when he was far advanced in years. He died anno 1590, in the eighty-second year of his age, having greatly increased the fortune he had from his father ; being possessed, as appears by his will, of the manors of Chevening, 

Chepsted

, 

Apuldefield

, 

Northsted

, &gt; 

Wickhurst

, and 

Brasted

, with other lands and tenements in the parishes of 

Sundrich

, 

Sevenoak

, Heaver, Shoreham, Chelsfield, Down, and 

Coudham

, in Kent, and of the manors of Little 

Carkon

, 

Colbile

 Weston, Moines Weston, 

Leverers

, and 

Gatewards

, with other lands and tenements in the parishes of Carlton, Weston, Willingham, Wickham, Brinkley, Borough, 

Barbarougham

, 

Ballham

, and 

Pannefworth

, in the county of Cambridge; and of the manor of Horton, in Yorkshire ; the manor of 

Broadmarston

, in Somersetshire ; and Staunton St. Quintin, in Wiltshire ; all which he bequeathed to his eldest son ; and 500 marks per annum to his younger son, Samuel Lennard, who was afterwards Knighted, and settled himself at West Wickham, in Kent, which was purchased about the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and was ancestor of the 

Lennards

 of that place, Baronets. This John Lennard lies buried under a very fine tomb in Chevening church, on which are the effigies, in full proportion, of himself and his wife, and underneath the following inscription.:"
Hue 

secessit

 Johannes Lennard, Armiger, 

una

 cum 

Elizabetha

 

uxore

 

sua

 ; 

hæc

 mortem 

obiit

, 26 

Octobris

 1585 ; 

illequatuorprincipum

 diploma- 

tibus'ad

 varia 

reipublicæ

 

munera

 

designatus

, 

quum

 in 

illis

 

exequendis

 

summam

 

diligentiam

, 

paremque

 

prudentiam

 

fidemque

 

præstitisset

: tandem 

octogesimo

 

secundo

 

ætatis

 anno 

ine

- 

unte

 

moritur

 

custosbrevium

 de banco : 

relictis

 

duobus

 

filiis

, et 

quinque

 

filiabus

, 

izmo

. Mar- 

tii

, 1590.
SOURCE: The Peerage of England by Arthur Collin, page 370-1.

ELIZABETH HARMON
Elizabeth Lennard formerly Harmon
Born about 1520 in Elam, 

Crayford

, Kent, England
ANCESTORS
Daughter of William Harmon and Margaret (Boteler) Harmon
[sibling(s) unknown]
Wife of John Lennard — married 1538 in 

Knole

, Kent, England
DESCENDANTS
Mother of Dorothy 

Margerie

 (Lennard) 

Calvert,Sampson

 Lennard MP, Timothy Leonard, Elizabeth (Lennard) 

Eure

, Rachel (Lennard) Neville, Benjamin Leonard, Samuel Leonard, Mary (Lennard) Gresham, 

Timothea

 (Lennard) Covert 

andAnn

 (Lennard) 

Darell

Died 26 Oct 1585 in Chevening, Kent, England
Profile managers: Tayler 

Mccormick

 [send private message], John Putnam [send private message], and 

JIm

 Walker [send private message]
Profile last modified 9 May 2019 | Created 13 Mar 2011
This page has been accessed 2,671 times.
Biography
She was buried at St Botolph's Churchyard, Chevening, 

Sevenoaks

 District, Kent, England.

Children of John Leonard and Elizabeth Harmon:

JOHN LEONARD SR.

John Lennard, as the eldest son, inherited his father's house and lands. He became a prosperous lawyer at Lincoln's Inn. Under Henry VIII he became a justice of the peace, prothonotary (clerk of court) of the common pleas. and was in the commission of the peace. Under Elizabeth I he was custos 

brevium

 (keeper of the writs) of the common pleas, and became sheriff of Kent. In 1551 he bought the manor of Chevening, and after 1570 he possessed the manor of 

Knole

, in 

Sevenoke

, where he then mostly lived. He married Elizabeth, daughter of William Harman, of Elham, in 

Crayford

. He died in 1590 and was buried in Chevening under a sumptuous tomb of alabaster, with figures of himself and his wife. At the time of his death he held the manors of Chevening, 

Chepsted

, 

Appulderfield

, 

Northsted

, and 

Wickhurst

. He left them all to his eldest son, Sampson. His youngest son, Samuel was knighted and settled in West Wickham. He also left five daughters. source: John Lennard, 

WikiTree

, https://www.wikitree.com/wiki/Lennard-100

John Leonard and Elizabeth Harmon

2056765571500000Knoll House

Born: 1508 England
Married: Elizabeth Harmon
Died: 3 Dec 1590 England
Parents: John Leonard &amp; Catherine Weston
John Lennard was High Sheriff of Kent; a Barrister of Lincoln's Inn, Holborn, London; and a gentleman of some wealth. His daughter Rachel became Lady 

Bergavenny

 when she married into the powerful Neville family, noble descendants of King Edward III of the House of Plantagenet. John Lennard lived and worked during the turbulent times of the Tudors: King Henry VIII, King Edward VI, Lady Jane Grey, Queen Mary I ("Bloody Mary"), and Queen Elizabeth I. The shire of Kent is very close to London and John, from his 

positi

 

421957592773500JOHN CLARK

10th Great-Grandfather of Andrew Mark Smallwood

LZZ7-ZJV

Chart #127.14 and #335

 
John Clark emigrated to the Massachusetts Bay colony aboard the ship “Lyon”, arriving in Boston 16 September 1632. He may have been the brother of William Clark and Nicholas Clark, also of Hartford. Robert Charles Anderson makes this statement in the Great Migration article on Nicholas Clark: “Various secondary sources suggest that Nicholas Clark was brother of John Clark of Cambridge, Hartford and points beyond, and of William Clark of Hartford. Nicholas Clark did come to New England on the same ship with John Clark, and held land in Cambridge near John Clark. On 4 September 1643 Nicholas and William Clark were codefendants in a suit brought by Matthew Allyn. No evidence other than this is seen for these possible relationships.”

However, it must be noted that in the article on John Clark in the Great Migration Begins, Anderson does not specify John Clark’s passage on the “Lyon”, and he does not attribute any children to John Clark. This is because Anderson does not feel that he can connect the John Clark of Hartford to the John Clark of 

Saybrook

. On the other hand, Donald Lines Jacobus in “Hale, House” says that John Clark of Hartford and John Clark of 

Saybrook

 and Milford are one and the same. One of the most convincing arguments that Jacobus’s observation is valid is in the will of John Clark in Milford, in which Clark names his son John of 

Saybrook

 and his daughters Elizabeth Pratt and Sarah Huntington and grandchild Sarah Huntington. These daughters marrying into the Pratt and Huntington families of Hartford clearly establishes the connection of John Clark of 

Saybrook

 and Milford with the John Clark of Hartford.

John Clark first resided in Cambridge where he was made freeman 6 May 1635, and where he was 

Hogreeve

, 5 December 1636, which establishes that he was not in the Rev. Hooker’s original party, but left soon after, as Anderson places his remove to Hartford in 1636. Since he served in the Pequot War, he was certainly in Hartford by 1637.

In the Hartford land inventory of February 1639/40 he held twelve parcels: four acres with a dwelling house, yards and gardens located on the west side of the road from Seth Grant’s to 

Centinel

 Hill; one rood and twenty perches in the Little Meadow; one rood in the Soldiers Field; one acre and eight perches in the east side of the Great River; two roods and twenty-five perches in the North Meadow; five acres, three roods and thirty-nine perches of meadow and swamp in the North Meadow; three acres of swamp on the east side of the Great River; fourteen acres in the Little 

Oxpasture

; six acres in the Cow Pasture; two acres, two roods and twelve perches in the Neck of Land; two more acres on the east side of the Great River; and an additional eleven acres, three roods and twelve perches in the Cow Pasture.

He removed to 

Saybrook

 by 1647, and served as Deputy for 

Saybrook

 to the Connecticut General Court in 1649, 1651 to 1657, 1659, and 1661 to 1663. He was a member of the war committee for 

Saybrook

, May 1653 and October 1654. He was selectman in 

Saybrook

 and 1656. He was named as Patentee of the Royal Charter of Connecticut in 1662, and was appointed Commissioner for 

Saybrook

 in 1664. He removed to Norwich for a short time around 1664, as he was admitted to the church in Milford in 1665, recorded as being dismissed from the church in Norwich.

While in Milford he served as Deputy to the Connecticut General court in 1666 to 1668. He was appointed Commissioner for Milford 1665 to 1674, though he could not have served in 1674 as he died in Milford on 5 February 1673/4.

He made his will on 17 February 1672 and it was probated at New Haven 12 February 1673/4.

https://www.foundersofhartford.org/the-founders/john-clarke/ Less

REVERAND WILLIAM BROWNE

10th Great-Grandfather of Andrew Mark Smallwood

LK55-CNN

Chart #132.10 and #369

William, Jane &amp; family emigrated to America in 1646 to 

Saybrook

, Connecticut, and later to Southampton, Long Island, New York State, where he was a merchant. Jane died of smallpox on the voyage and William died between 2-23rd July 1650 in Long Island, living with his daughter Mary Marvin.
For more, VIEW BIORGRAPHICAL ITEMS IN STORIES (MEMORIES) FOR THIS RECORD, LK55-CNN

DANIEL WING

10th Great-Grandfather of Andrew Mark Smallwood

KNXW-XBL

Chart #133.10 and #377

***A tablet to the memory of Daniel Wing was erected upon a rising eminence just at the rear of the present mansion, upon what was believed to have been his original homestead in Sandwich. This tablet was dedicated by the Wing Family on July 15, 1910.

Forefathers and descendants of Willard &amp; Genevieve Wilson Bartlett Saint Louis, Mo., c.1952 306 

pgs

Second Generation
Daniel Wing (John), of Sandwich n 1643 married, November 5, 1642, Hannah Swift, eldest daughter of William and Joan Swift, of Watertown in 1634, whose will of "12, 8 mo., 1662," is recorded. (New England Register, Vol. 6, p.96.) they had eleven children: Daniel Wing favored the Quakers, and a number of his descendants adhered to the. His will is recorded. (New England Register, Vol. 5, p.387.)

DANIEL WING
SON OF THE REV. JOHN AND DEBORAH WING, CAME TO BOSTON IN 1632 WITH HIS MOTHER AND BROTHERS JOHN, STEPHEN AND MATTHEW, WITH WHOM HE SETTLED IN SANDWICH IN 1637. HE BOUGHT THIS LAND FROM ANDREW HALLETT IN 1640, AND HERE HE LIVED AND DIED. HE WAS AN ORIGINAL MEMBER OF THE FIRST FRIENDS' MEETING IN AMERICA, ESTABLISHED AT SPRING HILL IN 1659, AND SUFFERED GREAT PERSECUTION AT THE HANDS OF THE PLYMOUTH GOVERNMENT IN THE CAUSE OF RELIGIOUS LIBERTY. HE DIED IN 1697 AND LIES BURIED AT SPRING HILL. ERECTED IN 1910 BY THE WING FAMILY OF AMERICA, INCORPORATED.

Daniel came to America with his mother Deborah and three brothers. They first went to Saugus, Mass and then to Sandwich in 1637. On July 28th 1640 Daniel acquired his first homestead. On December 5, 1641 he married Hannah Swift.

Hannah Swift Wing, the first wife of Daniel Wing, died January 1, 1664. Daniel and Hannah had 10 children: Hannah, Lydia, Deborah, Ephraim, Samuel, Hepzibah, John, Beulah, Deborah and Daniel Jr. Daniel was left with 9 living children (Deborah I having died) and was widowed for more than two years. On June 2, 1666 he married Anna Ewer, daughter of Thomas and Sarah (Learned) Ewer. They had three more children: Experience, Batchelor and 

Jashub

.

Daniel must have been something of a fisherman in his day. In 1652, the town made an 

agreemnt

 with Daniel Wing and Michael Blackwell, for the taking of the fish in Herring River.

The records of 

Monthy

 Meeting of Friends shows that the Sandwich Monthly Meeting was the first established in America, and this was before the year 1660. The families of Daniel and Stephen Wing were among the first eighteen to embrace the new religious teachings, demanding freedom of conscience and a separation of the church and state.

Daniel Wing was before the Plymouth Court on numerous occasions for refusing to take the oath of fidelity to English government, being fined each time after he had claimed with others of the "friends" that it was unlawful to take any 'oath' at all. He was also fined on several occasions for refusing to assist the marshal at Sandwich in persecutions of the Quakers. He was once fined five pounds, which, in those days, represented the ordinary earnings of a man for a whole year. Repeated fines having eaten into Daniel's holdings, his relatives cast about for some means of relief from such financial persecution. Under an old English law a man might be declared legally dead by the courts and his property made over to his heirs apparently a forerunner of our modern proceeding in bankruptcy.

Threatened with financial ruin by the fines imposed upon him, the 

shrewed

 old Quaker, while unyielding in his religious convictions, took advantage of this now almost 

forgotton

 law and caused his estate to be administered in his own life time. His brother John, then of Yarmouth, loyal to his brother even though himself a Non Quaker, seems to have conducted the proceedings for him. In the eyes of the English law Daniel Wing at the age of 43 was legally dead.

The Quaker persecutions ceased by the order of King Charles in 1662, and thereafter we find Daniel and Stephen Wing, with their fellow Quakers, assuming their old places in the public affairs of the colony, 

althought

 it was not until 1675 that the town of Sandwich voted to record the names as among those with "just rights and privileges of the town." The Plymouth Court already had restored Daniel's citizenship in 1669 and appointed him as one of two official surveyors of the highways. For the fact that Daniel, in his will made thirty nine years after his "legal death", left the bulk of his property to his younger children, all born after the episode of 1659, it is inferred that his older children continued to enjoy the fruits of his first acquired estate.

Son of the Rev. John and Deborah 

Bachiler

 Wing

Husband of Hannah Swift and Anna Ewer

Daniel married Hannah Swift on 5 Dec 1641 in Sandwich, Massachusetts.
He married his second wife, Anna Ewer, on 2 Jun 1666.
Contributor: Victoria Christian, Genealogical Research (48646708)

NOTE - As per the description of this cemetery, the very first paragraph states:
"Following the Quaker belief that tombstones were an unnecessary show of worldly grandeur, there are no tombstones in this ancient cemetery."

*****There are no tombstones in this cemetery.*****

Ulster

From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia

Coordinates: 54.4°N 7.0°W

Ulster

Ulaidh  (Irish)

Ulstèr

 (Ulster-Scots)

Flag

Coat of arms

Sovereign states

United Kingdom
Republic of Ireland

Area

 • Total

22,067 km2 (8,520 sq mi)

Ulster (/ˈʌlstər/; Irish: Ulaidh [ˈ

ʊlˠi

ː, ˈ

ʊlˠə

] or 

Cúige

 

Uladh

 [ˌ

kuːɟə

 ˈ

ʊlˠə

, - ˈ

ʊlˠu

ː]; Ulster Scots: 

Ulstèr

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulster" \l "cite_note-6" [6][7][8] or Ulster)[9][10][11] is one of the four traditional Irish provinces. It is made up of nine counties: six of these constitute Northern Ireland (a part of the United Kingdom); the remaining three are in the Republic of Ireland.

It is the second-largest (after Munster) and second-most populous (after Leinster) of Ireland's four traditional provinces, with Belfast being its biggest city. Unlike the other provinces, Ulster has a high percentage of Protestants, making up almost half of its population. English is the main language and Ulster English the main dialect. A minority also speak Irish, and there are 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaeltacht" \o "Gaeltacht" Gaeltachtaí

 (Irish-speaking regions) in southern County Londonderry, the Gaeltacht Quarter, Belfast, and in County Donegal; collectively, these three regions are home to a quarter of the total Gaeltacht population of Ireland.[12] Ulster-Scots is also spoken. Lough 

Neagh

, in the east, is the largest lake in the British Isles, while Lough Erne in the west is one of its largest lake networks. The main mountain ranges are the Mournes, 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sperrins" \o "Sperrins" Sperrins

, 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blue_Stack_Mountains" \o "Blue Stack Mountains" Croaghgorms

 and 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Derryveagh_Mountains" \o "Derryveagh Mountains" Derryveagh

 Mountains.

Historically, Ulster lay at the heart of the Gaelic world made up of Gaelic Ireland, Scotland and the Isle of Man. According to tradition, in ancient Ireland it was one of the fifths (Irish: cúige) ruled by a 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R%C3%AD" \l "R%C3%AD_ruirech" \o "Rí" rí

 

ruirech

, or "king of over-kings". It is named after the overkingdom of Ulaid, in the east of the province, which was in turn named after the Ulaid folk. The other overkingdoms in Ulster were 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Airg%C3%ADalla" \o "Airgíalla" Airgíalla

 and 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northern_U%C3%AD_N%C3%A9ill" \o "Northern Uí Néill" Ailech

. After the Norman invasion of Ireland in the 12th century, eastern Ulster was conquered by the Anglo-Normans and became the Earldom of Ulster. By the late 14th century the Earldom had collapsed and the O'Neill dynasty had come to dominate most of Ulster, claiming the title King of Ulster. Ulster became the most thoroughly Gaelic and independent of Ireland's provinces. Its rulers resisted English encroachment but were defeated in the Nine Years' War (1594–1603). King James I then 

colonised

 Ulster with English-speaking Protestant settlers from Great Britain, in the Plantation of Ulster. This led to the founding of many of Ulster's towns. The inflow of Protestant settlers and migrants also led to bouts of sectarian violence with Catholics, notably during the 1641 rebellion and the Armagh disturbances. Along with the rest of Ireland, Ulster became part of the United Kingdom in 1801. In the early 20th century, moves towards Irish self-rule were opposed by many Ulster Protestants, sparking the Home Rule Crisis. In the last all Ireland election (1918 Irish general election) counties Donegal and Monaghan returned large Sinn Féin (nationalist) majorities. Sinn Fein candidates ran unopposed in 

Cavan

. Fermanagh and Tyrone had Sinn Fein/Nationalist Party (Irish Parliamentary Party) majorities. The other four Counties of Ulster had Unionist Party majorities.[13] The home rule crisis and the subsequent Irish War of Independence, led to the partition of Ireland under the Government of Ireland Act 1920. Six Ulster counties became Northern Ireland, a self-governing territory within the United Kingdom, while the rest of Ireland became the Irish Free State, now the Republic of Ireland.

The term Ulster has no official function for local government purposes in either state. However, for the purposes of ISO 3166-2:IE, Ulster is used to refer to the three counties of 

Cavan

, Donegal and Monaghan only, which are given country sub-division code "IE-U".[14] The name is also used by various 

organisations

 such as cultural and sporting bodies.

Terminology

Ulster's name ultimately derives from the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulaid" \o "Ulaid" Ulaidh

, a group of tribes that once dwelt in this part of Ireland. The Norsemen knew the province as 

Ulaztir

, the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/t%C3%ADr" \l "Irish" \o "wikt:tír" tír

 or land (a word borrowed from Irish) of the 

Ulaidh

;[15] this was then taken into English as 

Ullister

 or 

Ulvester

, and later contracted to Ulster.[16] Another, less probable explanation is that the suffix -

ster

 represents the Old Norse element 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/sta%C3%B0r" \l "Old_Norse" \o "wikt:staðr" staðr

 ("place"), found in names like Lybster and 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scrabster" \o "Scrabster" Scrabster

 in Scotland.[15]

Ulster is still known as 

Cúige

 

Uladh

 in Irish, meaning the province (literally "fifth") of the 

Ulaidh

. 

Ulaidh

 has historically been 

anglicised

 as 

Ulagh

 or 

Ullagh

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulster" \l "cite_note-17" [17] and 

Latinised

 as 

Ulidia

 or 

Ultonia

.[18] The latter two have yielded the terms 

Ulidian

 and Ultonian. The Irish word for someone or something from Ulster is 

Ultach

, and this can be found in the surnames 

MacNulty

, 

MacAnulty

, and 

Nulty

, which all derive from Mac an 

Ultaigh

, meaning "son of the Ulsterman".[19]

Northern Ireland is often referred to as Ulster,[20] despite including only six of Ulster's nine counties. This usage is most common among people in Northern Ireland who are unionist,[21] although it is also used by the media throughout the United Kingdom.[22][23] Most Irish nationalists object to the use of Ulster in this context.[21]

Geography and political sub-divisions

Ulster (

coloured

), showing Northern Ireland in pink and the Republic of Ireland part in green

Ulster has a population of just over 2 million people and an area of 22,067 square 

kilometres

 (8,520 sq mi). About 62% of the area of Ulster is in the UK while the remaining 38% is in the Republic of Ireland. Ulster's biggest city, Belfast, has an urban population of over half a million inhabitants, making it the second-largest city on the island of Ireland and the 10th largest urban area in the UK. Six of Ulster's nine counties, Antrim, Armagh, Down, Fermanagh, Londonderry and Tyrone, including the former parliamentary boroughs of Belfast and Londonderry, form Northern Ireland which remained part of the United Kingdom after the partition of Ireland in 1921. Three Ulster counties – 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/County_Cavan" \o "County Cavan" Cavan

, Donegal and Monaghan – form part of the Republic of Ireland. About half of Ulster's population lives in counties Antrim and Down. Across the nine counties, according to the aggregate UK 2011 Census for Northern Ireland, and the ROI 2011 Census for counties 

Cavan

, Donegal and Monaghan, there is a Roman Catholic majority over Protestant of 50.8% to 42.7%.[24]

While the traditional counties continue to demarcate areas of local government in the Republic of Ireland, this is no longer the case in Northern Ireland. Since 1974, the traditional counties have a ceremonial role only. Local government in Northern Ireland is today demarcated by 11 districts.

Geography and political sub-divisions[edit]

Ulster (

coloured

), showing Northern Ireland in pink and the Republic of Ireland part in green

Ulster has a population of just over 2 million people and an area of 22,067 square 

kilometres

 (8,520 sq mi). About 62% of the area of Ulster is in the UK while the remaining 38% is in the Republic of Ireland. Ulster's biggest city, Belfast, has an urban population of over half a million inhabitants, making it the second-largest city on the island of Ireland and the 10th largest urban area in the UK. Six of Ulster's nine counties, Antrim, Armagh, Down, Fermanagh, Londonderry and Tyrone, including the former parliamentary boroughs of Belfast and Londonderry, form Northern Ireland which remained part of the United Kingdom after the partition of Ireland in 1921. Three Ulster counties – 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/County_Cavan" \o "County Cavan" Cavan

, Donegal and Monaghan – form part of the Republic of Ireland. About half of Ulster's population lives in counties Antrim and Down. Across the nine counties, according to the aggregate UK 2011 Census for Northern Ireland, and the ROI 2011 Census for counties 

Cavan

, Donegal and Monaghan, there is a Roman Catholic majority over Protestant of 50.8% to 42.7%.[24]

While the traditional counties continue to demarcate areas of local government in the Republic of Ireland, this is no longer the case in Northern Ireland. Since 1974, the traditional counties have a ceremonial role only. Local government in Northern Ireland is today demarcated by 11 districts.

Economy

The GDP of the province of Ulster is around €50 billion. Salary levels are the lowest on the island of Ireland.

Area

Population

Country

Largest settlement

GDP €

GDP per person €

Greater Belfast

720,000

NI

Belfast

€20.9 bn

€33,550

Border Region (includes two non-Ulster counties)

430,000 (roughly half in Ulster)

ROI

Letterkenny

€10.7 bn

€21,100

East of Northern Ireland

430,000

NI

Ballymena

€9.5 bn

€20,300

North of Northern Ireland

280,000

NI

Derry

€5.5 bn

€18,400

West and South of Northern Ireland

400,000

NI

Newry

€8.4 bn

€19,300

[25]

Physical geography

The biggest lake in the British Isles, Lough 

Neagh

, lies in eastern Ulster. The province's highest point, 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slieve_Donard" \o "Slieve Donard" Slieve

 

Donard

 (848 

metres

 (2,782 ft)), stands in County Down. The most northerly point in Ireland, 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malin_Head" \o "Malin Head" Malin

 Head, is in County Donegal, as are the sixth-highest (601 

metres

 (1,972 ft)) sea cliffs in Europe, at 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Slieve_League" \o "Slieve League" Slieve

 League, and the province's largest island, 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arranmore" \o "Arranmore" Arranmore

. The most easterly point in Ireland is also in Ulster, in County Down, and the most westerly point in the UK is in County Fermanagh. The longest river in the British Isles, the Shannon, rises at the Shannon Pot in County 

Cavan

 with underground tributaries from County Fermanagh. Volcanic activity in eastern Ulster led to the formation of the Antrim Plateau and the Giant's Causeway, one of Ireland's three UNESCO World Heritage Sites. Ulster also has a significant drumlin belt. The geographical 

centre

 of Ulster lies between the villages of Pomeroy and Carrickmore in County Tyrone. In terms of area, County Donegal is the largest county in all of Ulster.

At White Park Bay

 

Countryside west of Ballynahinch

 

Mourne country cottage

 

The track of the County Donegal Railways Joint Committee (CDRJC) restored next to Lough Finn, near 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fintown_railway_station" \o "Fintown railway station" Fintown

 station.

 

The approach of autumn, 

Tardree

 forest

Transport

Air

The province's main airport is Belfast International Airport (popularly called Aldergrove Airport), which is located at Aldergrove, 11.5 miles northwest of Belfast near Antrim. George Best Belfast City Airport (sometimes referred to as "the City Airport" or "the 

Harbour

 Airport") is another, smaller airport which is located at Sydenham in Belfast. The City of Derry Airport is located at Eglinton, 13 

kilometres

 (8 mi) east of the city of Derry. There is also Donegal Airport (Irish: Aerfort Dhún na nGall), popularly known as 

Carrickfinn

 Airport, which is located in The Rosses.

Rail

Railway lines are run by Northern Ireland Railways (NIR). Belfast to Bangor and Belfast to 

Lisburn

 are strategically the most important routes on the network with the greatest number of passengers and largest profit margins. The Belfast-Derry railway line connecting Londonderry railway station, via Coleraine, Ballymoney, 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ballymena_railway_station" \o "Ballymena railway station" Ballymena

 and Antrim, with Lanyon Place and Belfast Great Victoria Street is a noted scenic route. Belfast is also connected with 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carrickfergus_railway_station" \o "Carrickfergus railway station" Carrickfergus

 and Larne 

Harbour

, Portadown, 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Newry_railway_station" \o "Newry railway station" Newry

 and onwards, via the Enterprise service jointly operated by NIR and 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iarnr%C3%B3d_%C3%89ireann" \o "Iarnród Éireann" Iarnród

 

Éireann

, to Dublin Connolly.

The main railway lines linking to and from Belfast Great Victoria Street and Belfast Central are:

The Derry Line and the Portrush Branch

The Larne Line

The Bangor Line

The Portadown Line

Only five Irish counties, all in Southern and Western Ulster, currently have no mainline railway. The historic Great Northern Railway of Ireland connected them. They are 

Cavan

, Monaghan, Fermanagh, Tyrone and Donegal. A plan to re-link Sligo and Derry through Donegal has been postponed until at least 2030.[26]

Languages and dialects

Main articles: Ulster English, Ulster Irish, Hiberno-English, and Ulster Scots dialects

Most people in Ulster speak English. English is taught in all schools in the province; Irish (Gaeilge) is taught in all schools in the counties that are part of the Republic, and in schools in Northern Ireland, almost exclusively in the Roman Catholic and Irish-medium sectors. In responses to the 2001 census in Northern Ireland 10% of the population had "some knowledge of Irish"[27] and 4.7% could "speak, read, write and understand" Irish.[27] Large parts of County Donegal are Gaeltacht areas where Irish is the first language and some people in west Belfast also speak Irish, especially in the "Gaeltacht Quarter".[28] The dialect of Irish most commonly spoken in Ulster (especially throughout Northern Ireland and County Donegal) is Gaeilge Thír Chonaill or Donegal Irish, also known as Gaeilge Uladh or Ulster Irish. Donegal Irish has many similarities to Scottish Gaelic. Polish is the third most common language. Ulster Scots dialects, sometimes known by the neologism 

Ullans

, are also spoken in Counties Down, Antrim, Londonderry and Donegal.[29]

History

Early history

Further information: History of Ireland

Ulster is one of the four Irish provinces. Its name derives from the Irish language 

Cúige

 

Uladh

 (pronounced [ˌ

kuːɟə

 ˈ

ʊlˠə

]), meaning "fifth of the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ulaid" \o "Ulaid" Ulaidh

", named for the ancient inhabitants of the region.

The province's early story extends further back than written records and survives mainly in legends such as the Ulster Cycle. The archaeology of Ulster, formerly called 

Ulandia

, gives examples of "ritual enclosures", such as the Giant's Ring near Belfast, which is an earth bank about 590 feet (180 m) in diameter and 15 feet (4.5 m) high, in the 

centre

 of which there is a dolmen.[30]

The Boyne and its tributary the Blackwater were the traditional southern boundary of the province of Ulster and appear as such in the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T%C3%A1in_B%C3%B3_C%C3%BAailnge" \o "Táin Bó Cúailnge" Táin

 

Bó

 

Cúailnge

. According to historian Francis John Byrne the Ulaid 'possibly still ruled directly in 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/County_Louth" \o "County Louth" Louth

 as far as the Boyne in the early seventh century'[31] when 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Congal_C%C3%A1ech" \o "Congal Cáech" Congal

 

Cáech

 made a bid for the kingship of Tara. In 637, the Battle of Moira, known archaically as the Battle of 

Magh

 Rath, was fought by the Gaelic High King of Ireland 

Domhnall

 II against his foster son King 

Congal

 

Cáech

 of Ulster, supported by his ally 

Domhnall

 the Freckled (

Domhnall

 

Brecc

) of Dalriada. The battle was fought near the Woods of 

Killultagh

, just outside the village of Moira in what would become County Down. It was allegedly the largest battle ever fought on the island of Ireland, and resulted in the death of 

Congal

 and the retreat of 

Domhnall

 

Brecc

.

In early medieval Ireland, a branch of the Northern Uí 

Néill

, the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cen%C3%A9l_nE%C3%B3gain" \o "Cenél nEógain" Cenél

 

nEógain

 of the province of 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ailech" \o "Ailech" Ailech

, gradually eroded the territory of the province of 

Ulaidh

 until it lay east of the River Bann. The 

Cenél

 

nEógain

 would make 

Tír

 

Eóghain

 (most of which forms modern County Tyrone) their base. Among the High Kings of Ireland were 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%81ed_Findliath" \o "Áed Findliath" Áed

 

Findliath

 (died 879), Niall 

Glúndub

 (died 919), and 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Domnall_ua_N%C3%A9ill" \o "Domnall ua Néill" Domnall

 

ua

 

Néill

 (died 980), all of the 

Cenél

 

nEógain

. The province of 

Ulaidh

 would survive restricted to the east of modern Ulster until the Norman invasion in the late 12th century. It would only once more become a province of Ireland in the mid-14th century after the collapse of the Norman Earldom of Ulster, when the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/O%27Neill" \o "O'Neill" O'Neills

 who had come to dominate the Northern Uí 

Néill

 stepped into the power vacuum and staked a claim for the first time the title of "king of Ulster" along with the Red Hand of Ulster symbol. It was then that the provinces of 

Ailech

, 

Airgialla

, and 

Ulaidh

 would all merge largely into what would become the modern province of Ulster.

A bronze statue commemorating The Flight of the Earls at 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rathmullan" \o "Rathmullan" Rathmullan

 in north County Donegal.

Domnall

 

Ua

 

Lochlainn

 (died 1121) and 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Muirchertach_Mac_Lochlainn" \o "Muirchertach Mac Lochlainn" Muirchertach

 Mac 

Lochlainn

 (died 1166) were of this dynasty. The 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Meic_Lochlainn" \o "Meic Lochlainn" Meic

 

Lochlainn

 were in 1241 overthrown by their kin, the clan Ó 

Néill

 (see O'Neill dynasty). The Ó 

Néill's

 were from then on established as Ulster's most powerful Gaelic family.

The Ó 

Domhnaill

 (O'Donnell) dynasty were Ulster's second most powerful clan from the early thirteenth-century through to the beginning of the seventeenth-century. The 

O'Donnells

 ruled over 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/T%C3%ADr_Chonaill" \o "Tír Chonaill" Tír

 

Chonaill

 (most of modern County Donegal) in West Ulster.

After the Norman invasion of Ireland in the twelfth century, the east of the province fell by conquest to Norman barons, first De Courcy (died 1219), then Hugh de Lacy (1176–1243), who founded the Earldom of Ulster based on the modern counties of Antrim and Down.

In the 1600s Ulster was the last redoubt of the traditional Gaelic way of life, and following the defeat of the Irish forces in the Nine Years War (1594–1603) at the battle of Kinsale (1601), Elizabeth I's English forces succeeded in subjugating Ulster and all of Ireland.

The Gaelic leaders of Ulster, the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/O%27Neill_dynasty" \o "O'Neill dynasty" O'Neills

 and 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/O%27Donnell" \o "O'Donnell" O'Donnells

, finding their power under English suzerainty limited, decamped 

en

 masse in 1607 (the Flight of the Earls) to Roman Catholic Europe. This allowed the English Crown to plant Ulster with more loyal English and Scottish planters, a process which began in earnest in 1610.

Plantations and civil wars

The Plantation of Ulster (Irish: Plandáil Uladh) was the 

organised

 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colonisation" \o "Colonisation" colonisation

 (or plantation) of Ulster by people from Great Britain (especially Presbyterians from Scotland). Private plantation by wealthy landowners began in 1606,[32][33][34] while the official plantation controlled by King James I of England (who was also King James VI of Scots) began in 1609. All land owned by Irish chieftains, the Ó 

Neills

 and Ó 

Donnells

 (along with those of their supporters), who fought against the English Crown in the Nine Years War, were confiscated and used to settle the colonists. The Counties Tyrconnell, Tyrone, Fermanagh, Cavan, Coleraine and Armagh comprised the official Colony.[35] However, most of the counties, including the most heavily 

colonised

 Counties Antrim and Down, were privately 

colonised

.[32][33][34] These counties, though not officially designated as subject to Plantation, had suffered violent depopulation during the previous wars and proved attractive to Private Colonialists from nearby Britain. The efforts to attract colonists from England and Scotland to the Ulster Plantation were considerably affected by the existence of British colonies in the Americas, which served as a more attractive destination for many potential emigrants.[36]

The official reason for the Plantation is said to have been to pay for the costly Nine Years' War,[37] but this view was not shared by all in the English government of the time, most notably the English Crown-appointed Attorney-General for Ireland in 1609, Sir John Davies:

A barbarous country must be first broken by a war before it will be capable of good government; and when it is fully subdued and conquered, if it be not well planted and governed after the conquest, it will eftsoons return to the former barbarism.[38]

A modern Protestant mural in Belfast celebrating Oliver Cromwell and his activities.

The Plantation of Ulster continued well into the 18th century, interrupted only by the Irish Rebellion of 1641. This Rebellion was initially led by Sir 

Phelim

 O'Neill (Irish: Sir 

Féilim

 Ó 

Néill

), and was intended to overthrow British rule rapidly, but quickly degenerated into attacks on colonists, in which dispossessed Irish slaughtered thousands of the colonists. In the ensuing wars (1641–1653, fought against the background of civil war in England, Scotland and Ireland), Ulster became a battleground between the Colonialists and the native Irish. In 1646, an Irish army under command by Owen Roe O'Neill (Irish: Eoghan 

Ruadh

 Ó 

Néill

) inflicted a defeat on a Scottish Covenanter army at 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Battle_of_Benburb" \o "Battle of Benburb" Benburb

 in County Tyrone, but the native Irish forces failed to follow up their victory and the war lapsed into stalemate. The war in Ulster ended with the defeat of the native army at the Battle of 

Scarrifholis

, near 

Newmills

 on the western outskirts of Letterkenny, County Donegal, in 1650, as part of the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland conducted by Oliver Cromwell and the New Model Army, the aim of which was to expel all native Irish to the Province of Connaught.[39]

Forty years later, in 1688–1691, the Williamite War was fought, the belligerents of which were the Williamites and 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jacobitism" \o "Jacobitism" Jacobites

. The war was partly due to a dispute over who was the rightful claimant to the British Throne, and thus the supreme monarch of the nascent British Empire. However, the war was also a part of the greater War of the Grand Alliance, fought between King Louis XIV of France and his allies, and a European-wide coalition, the Grand Alliance, led by Prince William of Orange and Emperor Leopold I of the Holy Roman Empire, supported by the Vatican and many other states. The Grand Alliance was a cross-denominational alliance designed to stop French eastward colonialist expansion under Louis XIV, with whom King James II was allied.

The majority of Irish people were "

Jacobites

" and supported James II due to his 1687 Declaration of Indulgence or, as it is also known, The Declaration for the Liberty of Conscience, that granted religious freedom to all denominations in England and Scotland and also due to James II's promise to the Irish Parliament of an eventual right to self-determination.[40][41] However, James II was deposed in the Glorious Revolution, and the majority of Ulster Colonialists (Williamites) backed William of Orange. It is of note that both the Williamite and Jacobite armies were religiously mixed; William of Orange's own elite forces, the Dutch Blue Guards had a papal banner with them during the invasion, many of them being Dutch Roman Catholics.[42]

At the start of the war, Irish 

Jacobites

 controlled most of Ireland for James II, with the exception of the Williamite strongholds at Derry and at 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enniskillen" \o "Enniskillen" Enniskillen

 in Ulster. The 

Jacobites

 besieged Derry from December 1688 to July 1689, ending when a Williamite army from Britain relieved the city. The Williamites based in 

Enniskillen

 defeated another Jacobite army at the battle of 

Newtownbutler

 on 28 July 1689. Thereafter, Ulster remained firmly under Williamite control and William's forces completed their conquest of the rest of Ireland in the next two years. The war provided Protestant loyalists with the iconic victories of the Siege of Derry, the Battle of the Boyne (1 July 1690) and the Battle of 

Aughrim

 (12 July 1691), all of which the Orange Order commemorate each year.

The Williamites' victory in this war ensured British rule in Ireland for over 200 years. The Protestant Ascendancy in Ireland excluded most of Ulster's population from having any Civil power on religious grounds. Roman Catholics (descended from the indigenous Irish) and Presbyterians (mainly descended from Scottish colonists) both suffered discrimination under the Penal Laws, which gave full political rights only to Anglican Protestants (mostly descended from English settlers). In the 1690s, Scottish Presbyterians became a majority in Ulster, due to a large influx of them into the Province.

Emigration

Considerable numbers of Ulster-Scots emigrated to the North American colonies throughout the 18th century (160,000 settled in what would become the United States between 1717 and 1770 alone).

Disdaining (or forced out of) the heavily English regions on the Atlantic coast, most groups of Ulster-Scots settlers crossed into the "western mountains," where their descendants populated the Appalachian regions and the Ohio Valley. Here they lived on the frontiers of America, carving their own world out of the wilderness. The Scots-Irish soon became the dominant culture of the Appalachians from Pennsylvania to Georgia. Author (and US Senator) Jim Webb puts forth a thesis in his book Born Fighting to suggest that the character traits he ascribes to the Scots-Irish such as loyalty to kin, mistrust of governmental authority, and a propensity to bear arms, helped shape the American identity.

In the United States Census, 2000, 4.3 million Americans claimed Scots-Irish ancestry. The areas where the most Americans reported themselves in the 2000 Census only as "American" with no further qualification (e.g. Kentucky, north-central Texas, and many other areas in the Southern US) are largely the areas where many Scots-Irish settled, and are in complementary distribution with the areas which most heavily report Scots-Irish ancestry.

According to the Harvard Encyclopedia of American Ethnic Groups, 400,000 people in the US were of Irish birth or ancestry in 1790 when the first US Census counted 3,100,000 white Americans. According to the 

encyclopaedia

, half of these Irish Americans were descended from Ulster, and half from the other three provinces of Ireland.[43]

Republicanism, rebellion and communal strife

Most of the 18th century saw a calming of sectarian tensions in Ulster. The economy of the province improved, as small producers exported linen and other goods. Belfast developed from a village into a bustling provincial town. However, this did not stop many thousands of Ulster people from emigrating to British North America in this period, where they became known as "Scots Irish" or "Scotch-Irish".[citation needed]

Political tensions resurfaced, albeit in a new form, towards the end of the 18th century. In the 1790s many Roman Catholics and Presbyterians, in opposition to Anglican domination and inspired by the American and French revolutions joined in the United Irishmen movement. This group (founded in Belfast) dedicated itself to founding a non-sectarian and independent Irish republic. The United Irishmen had particular strength in Belfast, Antrim and Down. Paradoxically however, this period also saw much sectarian violence between Roman Catholics and Protestants, principally members of the Church of Ireland (Anglicans, who 

practised

 the British state religion and had rights denied to both Presbyterians and Roman Catholics), notably the "Battle of the Diamond" in 1795, a faction fight between the rival "Defenders" (Roman Catholic) and "Peep 

O'Day

 Boys" (Anglican), which led to over 100 deaths and to the founding of the Orange Order. This event, and many others like it, came about with the relaxation of the Penal Laws and Roman Catholics began to be allowed to purchase land and involve themselves in the linen trade (activities which previously had involved many onerous restrictions). Protestants, including some Presbyterians, who in some parts of the province had come to identify with the Roman Catholic community, used violence to intimidate Roman Catholics who tried to enter the linen trade. Estimates suggest that up to 7000 Roman Catholics suffered expulsion from Ulster during this violence. Many of them settled in northern Connacht. These refugees' linguistic influence still survives in the dialects of Irish spoken in Mayo, which have many similarities to Ulster Irish not found elsewhere in Connacht. Loyalist militias, primarily Anglicans, also used violence against the United Irishmen and against Roman Catholic and Protestant republicans throughout the province.

In 1798 the United Irishmen, led by Henry Joy McCracken, launched a rebellion in Ulster, mostly supported by Presbyterians. But the British authorities swiftly put down the rebellion and employed severe repression after the fighting had ended. In the wake of the failure of this rebellion, and following the gradual abolition of official religious discrimination after the Act of Union in 1800, Presbyterians came to identify more with the State and with their Anglican 

neighbours

, due to their civil rights now being respected by both the state and their Anglican 

neighbours

.

The 1859 Ulster Revival was a major Christian revival that spread throughout Ulster.

Industrialisation

, Home Rule and partition

Royal Avenue, Belfast. Photochrom print circa 1890–1900.

In the 19th century, Ulster had the only large-scale 

industrialisation

 and became the most prosperous province on the island. In the latter part of the century, Belfast briefly overtook Dublin as the island's largest city. Belfast became famous in this period for its huge dockyards and shipbuilding – and notably for the construction of the RMS Titanic. Sectarian divisions in Ulster became hardened into the political categories of unionist (supporters of the Union with Britain; mostly, but not exclusively, Protestant) and nationalist (advocates of repeal of the 1800 Act of Union, usually, though not exclusively, Roman Catholic). Northern Ireland's current politics originate from these late 19th century disputes over Home Rule that would have devolved some powers of government to Ireland, and which Ulster Protestants usually opposed—fearing for their religious rights calling it "Rome Rule" in an autonomous Roman Catholic-dominated Ireland and also not trusting politicians from the agrarian south and west to support the more industrial economy of Ulster. This lack of trust, however, was largely unfounded as during the 19th and early 20th century important industries in the southernmost region of Cork included brewing, distilling, wool and like Belfast, shipbuilding.[44]

Thousands of unionists, led by the Dublin-born barrister Sir Edward Carson and James Craig, signed the "Ulster Covenant" of 1912 pledging to resist Home Rule. This movement also set up the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF). In April 1914, the UVF assisted with the landing of 30,000 German rifles with 3,000,000 rounds at Larne by blockading authorities. (See Larne gunrunning). The Curragh Incident showed it would be difficult to use the British army to enforce home rule from Dublin on Ulster's unionist minority.

In response, Irish republicans created the Irish Volunteers, part of which became the forerunner of the Irish Republican Army (IRA) – to seek to ensure the passing of the Home Rule Bill. Upon the outbreak of World War I in 1914, 200,000 Irishmen, both Southern and Northern, of all religious sects volunteered to serve in the British Army. This had the effect of interrupting the armed stand-off in Ireland. As the war progressed, in Ireland, opposition to the War grew stronger, reaching its peak in 1918 when the British government proposed laws to extend conscription to all able bodied Irishmen during the Conscription Crisis.

In the aftermath of World War I, the political party Sinn Féin ("Ourselves") won the majority of votes in the 1918 Irish general election, this political party pursued a policy of complete independent self-determination for the island of Ireland as outlined in the Sinn Féin campaign Manifesto of 1918, a great deal more than the devolved government/Home Rule advocated by the (I.P.P) Irish Parliamentary Party. Following the Sinn Féin victory in these elections the Irish Declaration of Independence was penned and Irish republicans launched a guerrilla campaign against British rule in what became the Irish War of Independence (January 1919 – July 1921). The fighting in Ulster during the Irish War of Independence generally took the form of street battles between Protestants and Roman Catholics in the city of Belfast. Estimates suggest that about 600 civilians died in this communal violence, the majority of them (58%) Roman Catholics (see The Troubles (1920–1922)). The IRA remained relatively quiescent in Ulster, with the exception of the south Armagh area, where Frank Aiken led it. A lot of IRA activity also took place at this time in County Donegal and the City of Derry, where one of the main Republican leaders was 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Peadar_O%27Donnell" \o "Peadar O'Donnell" Peadar

 O'Donnell. Hugh 

O'Doherty

, a Sinn Féin politician, was elected mayor of Derry at this time. In the First 

Dáil

, which was elected in late 1918, Prof. Eoin Mac 

Néill

 served as the Sinn Féin T.D. for Londonderry City.

1920 to present

Main article: History of Northern Ireland

See also: Demographics and politics of Northern Ireland and Politics of the Republic of Ireland

Partition of Ireland, first mooted in 1912, was introduced with the enactment of the Government of Ireland Act 1920, which gave a form of "Home rule" self-government to two areas, Southern Ireland, with its capital at Dublin, and "Northern Ireland", consisting of six of Ulster's central and eastern counties, both within a continuing United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland. Dissatisfaction with this led to the Irish War of Independence, which formally ceased on 11 July 1921. Low-level violence, however, continued in Ulster, causing Michael Collins in the south to order a boycott of Northern products in protest at attacks on the Nationalist community there. The Partition was effectively confirmed by the Anglo-Irish Treaty of 6 December 1921. One of the primary stipulations of the treaty was the transformation of Ireland into a self-governing British dominion called the Irish Free State (which later became the sovereign Republic of Ireland), but with the option of a continuation of the home rule institution of Northern Ireland, still within the United Kingdom, if the Northern Ireland Parliament (already in existence) chose to opt out of the Irish Free State. All parties knew that this was certain to be the choice of the Ulster Unionists who had a majority in the parliament, and immediately on the creation of the Free State they resolved to leave it.

Following the Anglo Irish treaty, the exact border between the new dominion of the Irish Free State and the future Northern Ireland, if it chose to opt out, was to be decided by the Irish Boundary Commission. This did not announce its findings until 1925, when the line was again drawn around six of Ulster's nine counties, with no change from the partition of 1920.

Electorally, voting in the six Northern Ireland counties of Ulster tends to follow religious or sectarian lines; noticeable religious demarcation does not exist in the South Ulster counties of 

Cavan

 and Monaghan in the Republic of Ireland. County Donegal is largely a Roman Catholic county, but with a large Protestant minority. Generally, Protestants in Donegal vote for the political party Fine Gael ("Family of the Irish").[45] However, religious sectarianism in politics has largely disappeared from the rest of the Republic of Ireland. This was illustrated when Erskine H. Childers, a Church of Ireland member and 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Teachta_D%C3%A1la" \o "Teachta Dála" Teachta

 

Dála

 (TD, a member of the lower house of the National Parliament) who had represented Monaghan, won election as President after having served as a long-term minister under Fianna 

Fáil

 Taoisigh 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/%C3%89amon_de_Valera" \o "Éamon de Valera" Éamon

 de Valera, Seán 

Lemass

 and Jack Lynch.

The Orange Order freely 

organises

 in counties Donegal, 

Cavan

 and Monaghan, with several Orange parades taking place throughout County Donegal each year. The only major Orange Order march in the Republic of Ireland takes place every July in the village of 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rossnowlagh" \o "Rossnowlagh" Rossnowlagh

, near 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ballyshannon" \o "Ballyshannon" Ballyshannon

, in the south of County Donegal.

As of 2017, Northern Ireland has seven Roman Catholic members of parliament, all members of Sinn Féin (of a total of 18 from the whole of Northern Ireland) in the British House of Commons at Westminster; and the other three counties have one Protestant T.D. of the ten it has elected to 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/D%C3%A1il_%C3%89ireann" \o "Dáil Éireann" Dáil

 

Éireann

, the Lower House of the Oireachtas, the parliament of the Republic of Ireland. At present (August 2007) County Donegal sends six T.D.'s to 

Dáil

 

Éireann

. The county is divided into two constituencies: Donegal North-East and Donegal South-West, each with three T.D.'s. County 

Cavan

 and County Monaghan form the one constituency called 

Cavan

-Monaghan, which sends five T.D.'s to the 

Dáil

 (one of whom is a Protestant).

The historic Flag of Ulster served as the basis for the Ulster Banner (often referred to as the Flag of Northern Ireland), which was the flag of the Government of Northern Ireland until the proroguing of the Stormont parliament in 1973.

Sport

In Gaelic games (which include Gaelic football and hurling), Ulster counties play the Ulster Senior Football Championship and Ulster Senior Hurling Championship. In football, the main competitions in which they compete with the other Irish counties are the All-Ireland Senior Football Championship and National Football League, while the Ulster club champions represent the province in the All-Ireland Senior Club Football Championship. Hurling teams play in the All-Ireland Senior Hurling Championship, National Hurling League and All-Ireland Senior Club Hurling Championship. The whole province fields a team to play the other provinces in the Railway Cup in both football and hurling. Gaelic Football is by far the most popular of the GAA sports in Ulster but hurling is also played, especially in Antrim, Armagh, Derry, and Down.

The border has divided association football teams since 1921.[48] The Irish Football Association (the I.F.A.) oversees the sport in N.I., while the Football Association of Ireland (the F.A.I.) oversees the sport in the Republic. As a result, separate international teams are fielded and separate championships take place (Irish Football League in Northern Ireland, League of Ireland in the rest of Ulster and Ireland). Anomalously, Derry City F.C. has played in the League of Ireland since 1985 due to crowd trouble at some of their Irish League matches prior to this. The other major Ulster team in the League of Ireland is Finn Harps of 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ballybofey" \o "Ballybofey" Ballybofey

, County Donegal. When Derry City F.C. and Finn Harps play against each other, the game is usually referred to as a 'North-West Derby'. There have been cup competitions between I.F.A. and F.A.I. clubs, most recently the 

 HYPERLINK "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Setanta_Sports_Cup" \o "Setanta Sports Cup" Setanta

 Sports Cup.

In Rugby union, the professional rugby team representing the province and the IRFU Ulster Branch, Ulster Rugby, compete in the Pro14 along with teams from Wales, Scotland, Italy, South Africa and the other Irish Provinces (Leinster, Munster and Connacht). They also compete in Europe's main club rugby tournament, the European Rugby Champions Cup, which they won (as the Heineken Cup) back in 1999. Notable Ulster rugby players include Willy John McBride, Jack Kyle and Mike Gibson. The former is the most capped British and Irish Lion of all time, having completed four tours with the Lions in the sixties and seventies. At international level players from Ulster join with those from the other 3 provinces to form the Irish national team. They do not sing the Irish national anthem but do sing a special song which has been written celebrating the "4 proud provinces" before matches start.

The Ulster Hockey Union 

organises

 field hockey in the province and contributes substantially to the all-island hockey team.[49]

Cricket is also played in Ulster, especially in Northern Ireland and East Donegal.[50] Ulster enters two teams into the Interprovincial Series; the North Knights and the North West Warriors, who are the respective representative teams of the Northern Cricket Union (NCU) and the North West Cricket Union (NWCU).

Golf is, however, by far the most high-profile sport and the sport that Ulster has succeeded at more than any other. Ulster has produced many great players over the years, from Fred Daly winning The Open Championship in 1947 at the Royal Liverpool Golf Club, Hoylake to most recently Rory McIlroy winning the US Open and Darren Clarke winning The Open Championship in 2011. Ulster also has another Major winner in Graeme McDowell, who also won the US Open in 2010. The Open Championship returned to Ulster, after 68 years, in 2019 at Royal Portrush Golf Club.

In horse racing, specifically National Hunt, Ulster has produced the most dominant jockey of all time, Tony McCoy.

The Circuit of Ireland Rally is an annual automobile rally held in Ulster since 1931.

3876675top00A COMPENDIUM OF IRISH BIOGRAPHY, 1878

HUGH MAGUIRE     G8D6-TB3

1555 – 18 February 1600

-114300512572000-352425221107000216217548768000038576254448175001762125206819500

In 1492 Hugh Maguire the Chieftain of 

Fermangh

 Ireland, built Castle 

Einnskillen

 which is still being used as a museum and a battalion station today.

Maguire, Hugh, Lord of Fermanagh, who took a prominent part in the war during Elizabeth's reign, was son of 

Cuconnaught

 Maguire, Prince of Fermanagh, and cousin of Hugh O'Neill. His mother was Nuala, daughter of Manus O'Donnell. On the death of his father in 1589, he became possessed of the estates held by his ancestors since 1302. He soon took up a defiant attitude towards the Government, replying, when told by the Deputy Fitzwilliam that he must allow the Queen's writs to run in Fermanagh: "Your sheriff shall be welcome, but let me know his eric, that if my people should cut off his head I may levy it upon the country." He 

succoured

 Hugh Roe O'Donnell in his escape from Dublin Castle. In 1593 he besieged the sheriff and his party in a church, and would have starved them out, but for the intervention of Hugh O'Neill, then an ally of the Anglo-Irish. On 3rd July of the same year Maguire carried off a large prey of cattle from 

Tulsk

, from under the eyes of Sir Richard Bingham, Governor of Connaught. 

388239092392500SIR JOHN DUNHAM     LV8S-64K

1450 - 1524

4127500370586000The Four Masters give a spirited account of the engagement. Sir William Clifford and a few horsemen were slain on Bingham's side, while Maguire lost, amongst several of his party, Edmond 

MacGauran

 (Archbishop of Armagh) and 

Cathal

 Maguire. Some months later he unsuccessfully 

endeavoured

 to prevent Marshal Bagnall and Hugh O'Neill crossing the Erne at 

Athcullin

. We are told that his forces, a great number of whom were slain, consisted of Irish, armed with battle-axes, and some Scotch allies, armed with bows. Hugh O'Neill was severely wounded in the thigh in the contest. According to 

MacGeoghegan

, the Anglo-Irish were ultimately forced back across the river. Early in 1594 the Anglo-Irish took and garrisoned 

Enniskillen

; and in June it was invested by Maguire and his friend Hugh Roe O'Donnell, who had collected a large force for the purpose. 

Sir George Bingham 

endeavoured

 to raise the siege in August, but was intercepted by Maguire at a ford on the 

Arney

 river (now 

Drumane

 bridge), in the County of Fermanagh, and defeated with a loss of some 400 men. This engagement was generally known as the battle of Bel-Atha-

na

-

mBriosgaidh

 (the Ford of the Biscuits), from the quantity of biscuits and supplies taken by the Irish. The garrison of 

Enniskillen

 surrendered almost immediately after this disaster. 

Next year Maguire devastated 

Cavan

, so that he did not leave a "hut in which two or three persons might be protected" in the entire district. He threw himself heart and soul into O'Neill's war, and took part in the victory of 

Clontibret

 and 

Kilclooney

, and was in command of the cavalry at 

Mullaghbrack

 in 1596, where the Anglo-Irish were defeated with heavy loss. The same year he was, with O'Neill and O'Donnell, formally outlawed, and a price was set upon his head. In 1598 he held a command at the defeat of Marshal Bagnall at the Yellow Ford. Next year Maguire joined O'Donnell in a marauding expedition into Thomond, and took 

Inchiquin

 Castle. In March 1600 he commanded the cavalry in Hugh O'Neill's expedition into Leinster and Munster. Accompanied by a small party, he 

reconnoitred

 the country towards Cork; but was intercepted by Sir 

Warham

 St. Leger and Sir Henry Power, with a superior force. Nothing daunted, he struck spurs into his horse, and dashed into the midst of the Deputy's band, where St. Leger inflicted a deadly wound on him with his pistol. Maguire, summoning his remaining strength, cleft his adversary's head through his helmet, and then fell exhausted and almost immediately expired. According to the Four Masters, "the death of Maguire caused a giddiness of spirit and a depression of mind in O'Neill and the Irish chiefs in general, and this was no wonder, for he was the bulwark of 

valour

 and prowess, the shield of protection and shelter, the tower of support and 

defence

, and the pillar of the hospitality and achievements of the 

Oirghialla

, and of almost all the Irish of his time." His wife was a daughter of Hugh O'Neill. 

Hugh Maguire's name will probably live longest in the ode addressed to him by his bard, 

O'Hussey

, which has been so forcibly rendered into English by Mangan. 

Sources 

3. Actors, Representative: W. Clark Russell. London,1875. 

52. Burke, Sir Bernard: Dormant, Abeyant, Forfeited, and Extinct Peerages. London, 1866. 

134. Four Masters, Annals of Ireland by the: Translated and Edited by John O'Donovan. 7 vols. Dublin, 

1856. 

135. Four Masters, Annals of the: Translated by Owen Connellan. Dublin, 1846.

John Dunham was born in 1498 in 

Scrooby

, Nottinghamshire, England. His parents were John Dunham Esquire and Elizabeth 

Bowett

. The 

Dunhams

 were long time owners of large tracts of land in the vicinity of 

Scrooby

. John Dunham, Esquire, inherited property at Dunham-On-The-Trent. He married Elizabeth 

Bowett

, who had been the wife of William 

Chaworth

. Her Mother was the daughter of Sir John 

Zouche

 and through him of Bergh and De 

Bellaqua

. By her John Dunham had a son, Sir John Dunham. She died March 1501. In her will recorded at Newark-On-the-Trent, March 1502, she grants to her son, Sir John, the 

Kirklington

 Manor, as heir and remainder of Sir John 

Zouche

.

John married 

Benedicte

 

Folsgambe

 about 1522. They had at least one child, Ralph born about 1526 in 

Scrooby

.

John continued to acquire land throughout his life, and was mentioned several times in town records; In September 1509, John Dunham presided over a court of Inquisition at 

Southwell

. The Manor of 

Colwick

, was granted to John Dunham and Robert Clark in June 1502. John Dunham subsequently sold his interest to Sir John Sutton. In March 1513, John Dunham was appraiser of the estate of Ralph Langston 

Atworksop

. His son, Sir John Dunham, presided over a Court of Inquisition in 1528, Post Mortem of Robert Stanhope.

Sir John Dunham's property in 

Kirklington

 and 

Edingley

, some of which was held under the 

Arhbishop

 of York, consisted of thirty messuages, seven cottages, three hundred acres of land, two hundred acres of meadow, one hundred acres of pasture, forty acres of wood, and he held in other parts of 

Notte

, under Sir Edmund Bergh, a number of messuages, three hundred acres of land near Scooby, and also meadow and wood land.

John died in 1545 in 

Scrooby

, England.

Information from "The Dunham Genealogy" by Isaac Dunham. Compiled by G. Lewis, June 2011.

The Paynter Family’s Early Ancestors

WILLIAM PAYNTER II      LH5L-XVL

1530 England – 1580 England

“In the battle of 

Poictiers

, France, 1356 Sir George 

Camborn

, 

capatain

 of the archers, the 

tradiktional

 ancestor of the 

Paynters

 of 

Boskenna

, led the foremost rank. It was customary for a dismounted knight to lead the archers. Sir George was knighted on the field of battle and bore the crest 3 broken arrows.”

 

“Some generations later a descendant John de 

Camborn

 became an apprentice to a painter in London, training to be a highly skilled craftsman. He appears to have 

quarrelled

 with William Paynter of 

Gwinear

, Cornwall, and killed him. John fled to Ireland, stayed a long time, then came to St. 

Erth

, Cornwall, and set up a painter’s shop. He took the name of William 

Camborn

 alias Paynter, married William Paynter’s widow Elinor (nee Wilton) about 1558 and took over William’s lands. He received a grant of arms from the Garter King of Arms 22 July 1569. They were living at 

Deverall

, 

Gwinear

 and owned 

Trelissic

 

Walbert

 at St. 

Erth

. Elinor had seven children of the first marriage and one of the second.” (Page 10-11) 

Source: 

Boskenna

 &amp; the 

Paynters

 by Jim Hosking, Published by J. M. Hosking 1999, 

Pentreath

, 9 

Tredvar

 Drive, 

Penzance

, Cornwall, UK TR18 4SU; 

ISBN 0 9501296 4 X Printed by Headland Printers Ltd., 

Penzance

, Cornwall. 

ISBN 0 9501296 4X 

FORWORD (BY Douglas Williams M.B.E.) 

“This long-awaited story of the Paynter family, and of 

Boskenna

 Manor and estate, will rekindle memories in the minds and hearts of many in Cornwall and beyond. 

“That it is written by a St. 

Buryan

 man, born and bred, who mingles pride in his subject with a genuine understanding and sympathy, makes it all the more appreciated.” 

“A Cornish Bard, (Jim Hosking) aptly titled ‘

Ystorer

 

Trevow

’ (Historian of villages), Jim Hosking tells this story of life down the generations and centuries with accuracy and affection: it is the result of many years or research and deep interest.”

Clonony

 Castle in Ireland

George Boleyn – 2nd Viscount Rochford     LKTG-NMC

About 1504 England – 1536 England

right172974000

 • 9 May 2019

200977547447200040862253786505002000250208216500At 

Clonony

 castle in Ireland.. "there is a 

graveslab

 known locally as the monument of 'Queen Elizabeth’s cousins', which was brought here from a nearby quarry. The inscription reads: 'HERE UNDER LEYS ELIZABETH AND MARY BULLYN DAUGHTERS OF THOMAS BULLYN SON OF GEORGE BULLYN THE SON OF GEORGE BULLYN VISCOUNT ROCHFORD SON OF SR THOMAS BULLYN EARL OF ORMONDE AND WILSHIRE' https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clonony

2428240575310000

 • 20 January 2019

20764507620000004105275655828000

Clonony

 Castle (

Caisleán

 

Chluain

 

Damhna

) is a Tudor castle built by the 

MacCoughlan

 clan, and ceded to Henry VIII by John 

Óg

 

MacCoghlan

, then to Thomas Boleyn when Henry wanted to marry his daughter Anne.[1] Mary and Elizabeth Boleyn, second cousins to Queen Elizabeth I, lived out their lives in this castle and their tombstone still stands on the castle grounds. The grave was discovered in 1803, approximately 100 yards from the castle. The inscription on the eight feet by four feet, limestone flag reads: "Here under leys Elisabeth and Mary 

Bullyn

, daughters of Thomas 

Bullyn

, son of George 

Bullyn

 the son of George 

Bullyn

 Viscount Rochford son of Sir Thomas 

Bullyn

 Erle of Ormond and 

Willsheere

."

3352800144589500KristinRyan1 • 21 January 2019

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clonony

 • 31 December 2018

Clonony

 Castle (

Caisleán

 

Chluain

 

Damhna

) is a Tudor castle built by the 

MacCoughlan

 clan, and ceded to Henry VIII by John 

Óg

 

MacCoghlan

, then to Thomas Boleyn when Henry wanted to marry his daughter Anne. Mary and Elizabeth Boleyn, second cousins to Queen Elizabeth I, lived out their lives in this castle and their tombstone still stands on the castle grounds. The grave was discovered in 1803, approximately 100 yards from the castle. The inscription on the eight feet by four feet, limestone flag reads: "Here under leys Elisabeth and Mary 

Bullyn

, daughters of Thomas 

Bullyn

, son of George 

Bullyn

 the son of George 

Bullyn

 Viscount Rochford son of Sir Thomas 

Bullyn

 Erle of Ormond and 

Willsheere

."

KristinRyan1 • 31 December 2018

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Clonony

423862586677500Samuel Morse      KNS2-W2Z

2190750145669000Chart #126.14 and #331

Samuel Morse was born on June 12, 1576 in 

Boxted

, England, the son of Rev. Thomas and Margaret (King) Morse. 

He married Elizabeth Jasper on June 29, 1602 in Redgrave, Suffolk, England. 

4257675339344000He emigrated to America with his wife and seven children on the ship "Increase" that left England April 15, 1635. They had seven children: John, Daniel, Joseph, Elizabeth, Samuel, Sarah and Mary. 

They supposedly had another child: Eleanor Helena who was born in 1616 and died in 1694. 

They settled first in Watertown, Massachusetts where they "became comfortable to the orders and discipline and doctrines too of the Puritan Church to the joy which was doubtless their motive for emigrating. Representative men and old families of southeastern Massachusetts". 1912. Vol III page 1774 

"Subsequently Samuel resided in Dedham. He made his will Oct. 2, 1654, leaving all his estate, amounting in value to one hundred and twenty-four pounds and seven shillings, to his wife, Elizabeth, it to be divided after his death among his surviving children." Genealogy and History of Representative Citizens of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. 

Family Monument erected by Morse Family Descendants. 

According to ("Great Migration" V:170-177, published 2007 by NEHGS), Samuel was most probably the son of Rev. Thomas Morse of 

Foxearth

, Co. Essex, England. He died at Medfield, Massachusetts on Dec. 5, 1654. 

Note ... He married Elizabeth Jasper at Redgrave, Co. Suffolk on Jun. 29, 1602. 

Info provided by Kevin Avery (https://www.findagrave.com/memorial/16621360/samuel-morse)

Father: Thomas &amp; Margaret (King) Morse 

Immigration: 15 Apr 1635 Watertown, Massachusetts 1 Note: "15 April, 1635. These parties hereafter expressed are to be transported to New England, 

imbarqued

 in the Increase, Robert Lea master, having taken the oath of allegiance and supremacy, as being conformable to the orders and discipline of the Church of England, thereof they brought testimony per certificate from the Justices and Ministers where their abodes have lately been, Samuel Morse, husbandman, aged 50, Elizabeth Morse, aged 48, Joseph Morse, aged 20." 

In England Samuel had been a soldier in Cromwell's army. This the first statement in regard to Samuel Morse and his little family who came to Watertown at this date and there became members of that First Church. On August 15, 1636, there was a covenant adopted which had been drawn up for a company of twelve men to whom the Great and General Court of the Massachusetts Bay Colony had granted a tract of land lying south of the Charles river for a new settlement and among these twelve was Samuel Morse, whose name stood third on the paper, with those of Daniel Morse, who signed as the twenty-eighth, Joseph Morse as the twenty-ninth, and John Morse as the thirty-fourth, with one hundred and twenty-two others. 

At first they named this new place "Contentment," but, on September 10, 1636, the General Court decreed that it should be changed to that of Dedham. While forming this new colony "they took care to look after the rights of the natives, for every part of that territory was purchased of the Indians before it was assigned to the settlers." At a meeting of the 

new�proprietors

 in Watertown, September, 1636, Samuel Morse was appointed Collector of the money to be paid out as occasion should arise. By an early law of the Massachusetts colony, every settler was obliged to build his house within half a mile of the site chosen for the meeting house; each man received a home lot of eight or twelve acres of land conveyed to him according to his being a single or a married man, together with a share in a large 

inclosure

, called the Commons, which was to be cultivated by all the people "in common." 

November 8, 1638, a church covenant was prepared and on the 30, 5, 1641, Samuel Morse with others, members of the First Church in Watertown, were received into the newly organized church of Dedham. In the first Board 

of�Townsmen

 (afterwards called the selectmen) or "the Seven Men," Samuel Morse was the third man chosen for the important office. As their numbers increased, they, following the law that each family should be within a certain distance from "the meeting house," set about forming a new township, and Samuel Morse there received a home lot 

and�built

 a house in the place which received the name of Medfield. On February 21, 1675, in the general rise of the Indians against the settlers, his house was fired; a new house arose on the ground and this never passed from the possession of his 

descendants.�His

 will was dated at Medfield, Anno Domini, 10th month, 2d, 1654.Less 

Modified 26 August 2013 by AdellThompson1

Samuel Bullen and Mary Morse 

Samuel Bullen, son of Samuel Bullen was born in 1617 at Dedham, Norfolk, England. He may have been in New England as early as 1634. Samuel and brother John Bullen took land grants about 1636 in Dedham, Massachusetts. John was killed by the over-throwing of a cart in 1678. They claimed to be of the same lineage as Anne Boleyn, wife of Henry VIII. 

Samuel was at Watertown, Massachusetts about 1636, and when the General Court sitting at Newton granted a tract of land south of Charles River to twelve men, he and Samuel Morse were of this company. He married Mary, daughter of Samuel Morse, on June 10, 1641. He took the freeman’s oath (meaning he accepted the doctrine of the Church) in 1641. He owned a house in Medfield in 1646. His tombstone, erected by his descendants about a century after his death, declares that he was the “first European with a family in this town”. It is certain that his house was built prior to 1651. It stood a few rods north of Philip Street. His buildings were burned by the Indians (King Philip’s War) and he and his family fled to Sherborn and became tenants of his brother-in-law, Daniel Morse. A few years later he returned to Medfield and rebuilt. 

As a proprietor of Medfield, he drew lands in 

Medbury

, which by a division of the town, fell in 1713 in Medway. He was a tenant of Captain Hull’s farm and had land assigned him there, west of the Common and perhaps built opposite the Brush Hill road, before he returned to Medfield. 

He was one of the Selectman in Medfield in 1682 and was chosen deacon prior to 1689. His house was standing as late as 1798. Besides other out-lands, he had a “

divident

” on the east side of Mount Nebo and in the region known as “Goudy”. He died in Medfield on January 16, 1691 and Mary died the following year on February 14th. Their tombstones are still standing in Medfield. They had ten children. 

Morse 

Thomas Morse was born at Stoke by 

Neyland

, England in 1520. His son, Rev. Thomas Morse died in 1597 at 

Foxearth

, Essex, England. Samuel, son of Rev. Thomas, was born in 1585 at 

Boxted

, Essex, England. He married Elizabeth Jasper on June 20, 1602. She was the daughter of Lancelot Jasper and was born in 1587 at Redgrave, Suffolk, England. Samuel and Elizabeth Jasper Morse and family came to New England about the same time as Samuel Bullen and lived in the same places. Samuel Morse died at Medfield April 5, 1654 and Elizabeth on June 20, 1654. Their youngest daughter, Mary, married Samuel Bullen. She was born in England on August 13, 1620. Samuel Morse and family embarked in the “Increase” April 15, 1635. 

These stories from The 

Ouimette

 Family Heritage by Evelyn Claire Johnson 

Fredsall

, published in 1976. 

2724150148590000434340092392500Jacquetta of Luxembourg, Countess River      LYCZ-561

1416 – 1472

Was Elizabeth Woodville’s mother a witch? 

4457700695769500277177560953650023812503404870004381500424307000Jacquetta of Luxembourg, Countess Rivers (1415/16 – 30 May 1472) was the eldest daughter of Peter I of Luxembourg, Count of Saint-Pol, 

Conversano

 and Brienne, and his wife Margaret of 

Baux

 (Margherita del 

Balzo

 of Andria). She was a prominent, though often overlooked, figure in the Wars of the Roses. Through her short-lived first marriage to the Duke of Bedford, brother of King Henry V, she was firmly allied to the House of Lancaster. However, following the emphatic Lancastrian defeat at the Battle of 

Towton

, she and her second husband Richard Woodville sided closely with the House of York. Three years after the battle and the accession of Edward IV of England, Jacquetta's eldest daughter Elizabeth Woodville married him and became Queen consort of England. Jacquetta bore Woodville 14 children and stood trial on charges of witchcraft, of which she was exonerated. 

Shortly after her husband's execution by Warwick, Thomas Wake, a follower of Warwick's, accused Jacquetta of witchcraft. Wake brought to Warwick Castle a lead image "made like a man-of-arms . . . broken in the middle and made fast with a wire," and alleged that Jacquetta had fashioned it to use for witchcraft and sorcery. He claimed that the lead image had been found by "an honest person" Harry 

Kyngeston

 of Stoke 

Bruerne

, 

Northamptonshire

, in his house after the departure of soldiers, who delivered it to the parish clerk John 

Daunger

 of 

Shutlanger

 (in the parish of Stoke 

Bruerne

). 

Daunger

 could allegedly attest that Jacquetta had made two other images, one for the king and one for the queen. The case fell apart when Warwick released Edward IV from custody, and Jacquetta was cleared by the king's great council of the charges on 21 February 1470. In 1484 Richard III in the act known as Titulus Regius revived the allegations of witchcraft against the dead Jacquetta when he claimed that she and Elizabeth had procured Elizabeth's marriage to Edward IV through witchcraft; however, Richard never offered any proof to support his assertions. https://www.facebook.com/groups/3011182825820704/

Born in Luxembourg, about 1415, 

Jacquetta was the eldest daughter of Peter I of Luxembourg, and his wife, Margaret of 

Baux

. Jacquetta's paternal Great Grandmother was a descendant of England's King Henry III, and her maternal grandmother was a descendant of England's King John. 

Although not English, her excellent Royal lineage made her a perfect candidate for the wife of King Henry VI's Uncle, John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford. 

👑 At 17, Jacquetta and John were married. John was the most powerful man in England at the time, since the king was still just a child. By marrying John, Jacquetta became the highest ranking lady in England. 

👑 Very few records remain of their marriage, but it would seem that they were happy. John died two years into the marriage, leaving Jacquetta a young, beautiful, powerful widow, at 19. Her marriage to the Duke, legally gave her the right to retain her Royal title of Duchess, and she was to use this title all her life. 

👑 During her marriage to John, she met, and quite possibly fell in love with his Squire, Richard Woodville. There was now a law requiring all ladies related to the royal family by blood or marriage to get the king's permission before marrying. Jacquetta and Richard ignored it, and married in secret. 

👑 This infuriated the King, and he took away Jacquetta's lands and refused to see her. Over time, Jacquetta and Richard paid a £1,000 fine and the King welcomed them back to court, giving Jacquetta her lands back, and making Richard a Knight. Eleven years later, due to services to the King, Richard was made Baron Rivers, elevating, himself, Jacquetta and their 14 children back into the English nobility. Jacquetta was close to the Kings new Queen, Margaret of Anjou, and when the Wars of the Roses broke out, Jacquetta stayed close to the king and queen. 

👑 Jacquetta and Richard's eldest daughter, Elizabeth, married into a prominent Lancastrian family, The Greys. Elizabeth bore two sons with Sir John Grey, Thomas &amp; Richard. When John Grey was killed in battle, everything would change for the 

Woodvilles

..... 

👑 Three years after John Grey was killed, the King and Queen were overthrown by the Yorkists, and Edward, the Duke of York's eldest son, was crowned Edward IV of England. 

👑 Elizabeth, described as the most beautiful woman in England, decided to petition the new King for the release of her dower lands. 

Its

 been said, that as soon as Edward laid eyes on the beautiful Elizabeth, he fell madly in love with her. Refusing to be his mistress, they married in a secret ceremony, witnessed only by Jacquetta, the Priest and a choirboy. 

👑 Jacquetta's daughter was now the Queen of England. Jacquetta and Richard abandoned their support of Henry VI, who was held captive by Yorkist forces, and turned their backs on Margaret of Anjou, who fled with her son to Scotland. Jacquetta and her family were 

Yorks

 now, and Jacquetta herself was the Queen Mother. 

👑 Battles between the Lancastrians and Yorkists, and within the York faction itself, raged on. It was during one of these battles that Edward IV's cousin, Richard Neville, took Richard Woodville and his oldest son John, captive and executed them without a trial. Jacquetta's husband and eldest surviving son were dead. 

👑 Richard Neville drove Edward IV from the throne and Elizabeth and her children, went into sanctuary at Westminster Abbey. Richard Neville restored the Lancastrian King, and Jacquetta was brought up on witchcraft charges. Jacquetta was accused of being in possession of two lead images of Edward IV and Elizabeth. It was believed she used these images to make Edward IV fall in love with Elizabeth and elevate 

Jaquetta's

 family to the throne. Before the case could go any further, Edward returned with an Army, and took his throne back. The charges of Witchcraft against Jacquetta were dropped. 

👑 Jacquetta died May 30, 1472, about three years after her husband and son were wrongfully executed. She was around fifty-six years old. She left behind a large family of 12 surviving children out of 14, and numerous grandchildren. 

👑 Jacquetta's legacy.... One of those grandchildren, the eldest daughter of Elizabeth and Edward IV, married the conquering Henry Tudor and became Elizabeth of York, Queen of England. Elizabeth of York and Henry VII Tudor's daughter, Margaret Tudor, became queen of Scotland. After the century and a quarter reign of the Tudors, the crown of England went to Margaret's great-grandson, James VI of Scotland, who 

the

 became James I of England. All of the monarchs of England since then have been descended from this line. Margaret Tudor was Jacquetta's great-granddaughter, this means that every English monarch to sit on the throne from the moment Jacquetta's daughter Elizabeth became queen, is a direct descendant of Jacquetta, including the present Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom...... https://www.facebook.com/groups/3011182825820704

Jacquetta of Luxembourg, Countess Rivers (1415/1416-30 May 1472) was the eldest daughter of Peter I of Luxembourg, Count of Saint-Pol, 

Conversano

 and Brienne, and his wife Margaret of 

Baux

 (Margherita del 

Balzo

 of Andria). She was a prominent, though often overlooked, figure in the Wars of the Roses. Through her short-lived first marriage to the Duke of Bedford, brother of King Henry V, she was firmly allied to the House of Lancaster. However, following the emphatic Lancastrian defeat at the Battle of 

Towton

, she and her second husband Richard Woodville sided closely with the House of York. Three years after the battle and the accession of Edward IV of England, Jacquetta's eldest daughter Elizabeth Woodville married him and became Queen consort of England. Jacquetta bore Woodville 14 children and stood trial on charges of witchcraft, for which she was exonerated. 

«

b»Family

 and ancestry«/b» Her father Peter of Luxembourg, Count of Saint-Pol, was also the hereditary Count of Brienne from 1397 until his death in 1433. Peter had succeeded his father John of Luxembourg, Lord of Beauvoir and mother Marguerite of 

Enghien

, who had been Count and Countess of Brienne from 1394 to her death in 1397. John had been a fourth-generation descendant of 

Waleran

 I of Luxembourg, Lord of 

Ligny

, second son of Henry V of Luxembourg and Margaret of Bar. This cadet line of the House of Luxembourg held 

Ligny-en-Barrois

. 

Jacquetta's paternal great-grandmother, 

Mahaut

 of 

Châtillon

, was descended from Beatrice of England, daughter of King Henry III of England and Eleanor of Provence. Jacquetta's mother, Margherita del 

Balzo

, was a daughter of Francesco del 

Balzo

, 1st Duke of Andria, and 

Sueva

 Orsini. 

Sueva

 descended from Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester and Eleanor of England, the youngest child of King John of England and Isabella of 

Angoulême

. 

The 

Luxembourgs

 claimed legendary descent from the water deity Melusine through their ancestor Siegfried of Luxembourg (AD 922-998). Jacquetta was a fourth cousin twice removed of Sigismund of Luxembourg, the reigning Holy Roman Emperor and king of Bohemia and Hungary. «

b»Early

 life«/b» Most of Jacquetta's early life is a mystery. She was born as the Lancastrian phase of the Hundred Years War began. Her uncle, John II of Luxembourg, Count of 

Ligny

, was the head of the military company that captured Joan of Arc. John held Joan prisoner at Beauvoir and later sold her to the English. 

«

b»First

 marriage«/b» On 22 April 1433 at age 17, Jacquetta married John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford at 

Thérouanne

. The Duke was the third son of King Henry IV of England and Mary de 

Bohun

, and thus the grandson of John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster, himself the third son of King Edward III. The marriage was childless and the Duke died on 15 September 1435 at Rouen. As was customary at the time, after her second marriage Jacquetta retained the title of her first husband and was always known as the Duchess of Bedford, this being a higher title than that of countess. Jacquetta inherited one-third of the Duke's main estates as her widow's share. 

«

b»Second

 marriage«/b» Sir Richard Woodville, son of Sir Richard Woodville who had served as the late Duke's chamberlain, was commissioned by Henry VI of England to bring Bedford's young widow to England. During the journey, the couple fell in love and married in secret (before 23 March 1437), without seeking the king's permission. Jacquetta had been granted dower lands following her first husband's death on condition that she did not remarry without a royal 

licence

. On learning of the marriage, Henry VI refused to see them, but was mollified by the payment of a fine of £1000. The marriage was long and very fruitful: Jacquetta and Richard had fourteen children, including the future Queen Consort Elizabeth Woodville. She lost her first-born son Lewis to a fever when he was 12 years old. 

By the mid-1440s, the 

Woodvilles

 were in a powerful position. Jacquetta was related to both King Henry and Queen Margaret by marriage. Her sister, Isabelle de Saint Pol, married Margaret's uncle Charles du Maine while Jacquetta was the widow of Henry VI's uncle. She outranked all ladies at court with the exception of the queen. As a personal 

favourite

, she also enjoyed special privileges and influence at court. Margaret influenced Henry to create her husband Baron Rivers in 1448, and he was a prominent partisan of the House of Lancaster as the Wars of the Roses began. 

«

b»Wars

 of the Roses«/b» The Yorkists crushed the Lancastrians at the Battle of 

Towton

 on 29 March 1461, and Edward IV, the first king from the House of York, took the throne. The husband of Jacquetta's oldest daughter Elizabeth, Sir John Grey, had been killed a month before at the Second Battle of St. Albans, a Lancastrian victory under the command of Margaret of Anjou. At 

Towton

, however, the tables turned in 

favour

 of the Yorkists. 

Edward IV met and soon married the widowed Elizabeth Woodville in secret; though the date is not accepted as exactly accurate, it is traditionally said to have taken place (with only Jacquetta and two ladies in attendance) at the Woodville family home in 

Northamptonshire

 on 1 May 1464. Elizabeth was crowned queen on 26 May 1465. The marriage, once revealed, ruined the plans of Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick, Edward's cousin, who had been negotiating a much-needed alliance with France via a political marriage for Edward. 

With Elizabeth now Queen of England, the 

Woodvilles

 rose to great prominence and power. Jacquetta's husband Richard was created Earl Rivers and appointed Lord High Treasurer in March 1466. Jacquetta found rich and influential spouses for her children and helped her grandchildren achieve high posts. She arranged for her 20-year-old son, John, to marry the widowed and very rich Katherine Neville, Duchess of Norfolk, who was at least 45 years older than John. The rise of the 

Woodvilles

 created widespread hostility among the Yorkists, including Warwick and the king's brothers George and Richard, who were being displaced in the king's 

favour

 by the former Lancastrians. 

In 1469, Warwick openly broke with Edward IV and temporarily deposed him. Earl Rivers and his son John were captured and executed by Warwick on 12 August at Kenilworth. Jacquetta survived her husband by three years and died in 1472, at about 56 years of age. 

«

b»Witchcraft

 accusations«/b» Shortly after her husband's execution by Warwick, Thomas Wake, a follower of Warwick's, accused Jacquetta of witchcraft. Wake brought to Warwick Castle a lead image "made like a man-of-arms . . . broken in the middle and made fast with a wire," and alleged that Jacquetta had fashioned it to use for witchcraft and sorcery. He claimed that John 

Daunger

, a parish clerk in Northampton, could attest that Jacquetta had made two other images, one for the king and one for the queen. The case fell apart when Warwick released Edward IV from custody, and Jacquetta was cleared by the king's great council of the charges on February 21, 1470. In 1484 Richard III in the act known as Titulus Regius revived the allegations of witchcraft against the dead Jacquetta when he claimed that she and Elizabeth had procured Elizabeth's marriage to Edward IV through witchcraft; however, Richard never offered any proof to support his assertions. 

«

b»Heritage

«/b» Through her daughter Elizabeth, Jacquetta was the maternal grandmother of Elizabeth of York, wife and queen of Henry VII, and therefore an ancestor of all subsequent English monarchs. 

«

b»Children

«/b» 

1.) Elizabeth Woodville, Queen consort of England (c. 1437-8 June 1492), married first Sir John Grey, second Edward IV of England.

 2.) Lewis Woodville (c. 1438), died in childhood. 

3.) Anne Woodville (1438/9-30 July 1489), married first William 

Bourchier

, Viscount 

Bourchier

, second Sir Edward Wingfield, third George Grey, 2nd Earl of Kent. 

4.) Anthony Woodville, 2nd Earl Rivers (c. 1440-25 June 1483), married first Elizabeth Scales, 8th Baroness Scales, second Mary 

Fitzlewis

; not married to Gwenllian Stradling, the mother of Margaret. 

5.) John Woodville (c. 1444-12 August 1469), married Catherine Neville, Dowager Duchess of Norfolk. 

6.) Jacquetta Woodville (1445-1509), married John le Strange, 8th Baron Strange of 

Knockin

.

 7.) Lionel Woodville, Bishop of Salisbury (c. 1446-June 1484).

 8.) Eleanor Woodville (d. c. 1512), married Sir Anthony Grey, son of Edmund Grey, 1st Earl of Kent. 

9.) Margaret Woodville (c. 1450-1490/1), married Thomas 

Fitzalan

, 17th Earl of Arundel. 

10.) Martha Woodville (d. c. 1500), married Sir John Bromley. 

11.) Richard Woodville, 3rd Earl Rivers (1453-March 1491). 

12.) Edward Woodville, Lord Scales (1454/8-28 July 1488). 

13.) Mary Woodville (c. 1456-1481), married William Herbert, 2nd Earl of Pembroke. 

14.) Catherine Woodville (c. 1458-18 May 1497), married first Henry Stafford, 2nd Duke of Buckingham, second Jasper Tudor, Duke of Bedford. 

The Visitation of Buckinghamshire of 1566 mentions the marriage of William Dormer of Wycombe (only later of 

Ascott

 House) to "Agnes, da. of Sir Richard 

Woodvyle

, Erle 

Ryvers

" but does not say whether the father was the first or the third earl, who the mother was or whether Agnes was legitimate. 

«

b»In

 fiction«/b» Jacquetta is a main character in Philippa Gregory's 2009 novel The White Queen, a fictionalized account of the life of her eldest daughter Elizabeth. In the novel, Jacquetta is portrayed as having indeed dabbled quite a bit in witchcraft, displaying what would seem to be actual power. She is also the main protagonist in Gregory's 2011 prequel novel The Lady of the Rivers. Gregory's works explore the historical claim by Jacquetta's family that they were descended from the water deity Melusine. Gregory uses Jacquetta's tenuous ties to Melusine and Joan of Arc to further her potential ties to witchcraft. In the 2013 BBC One/Starz television series adaptation The White Queen, Jacquetta is portrayed by actress Janet McTeer. Jacquetta is also an important character in Margaret Frazer's fifth "Player Joliffe" novel, A Play of Treachery (2009). The story is set in 1435-6, after the death of her first husband, John, Duke of Bedford. This historical novel tells a tale regarding her marriage to Sir Richard Woodville. There is no mention of witchcraft in this novel.

 Jacquetta is also a prominent character in The Last of the Barons (1843), a novel by Edward Bulwer-Lytton (1803-1873). The book's title is a reference to Richard Neville, Earl of Warwick.

438150086233000Margaret Wotton      LH7D-NLJ

22955251344295001485 - 1535

Margaret Wotton: Marchioness of Dorset

Spouse(s):

William Medley

Thomas Grey, 2nd Marquess of Dorset

Issue

4467225352552000George Medley

2428875368109500Lady Elizabeth Grey

Lady Katherine Grey

Lady Anne Grey

Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Suffolk

Lord John Grey

Lord Thomas Grey

Leonard Grey

Lady Mary Grey

2390775584581000

Father: Sir Robert Wotton

4629150631380500Mother: Anne Belknap

Born: 1487 Boughton Malherbe, Kent, England

2571750741108500Died: 1541 England

Margaret Wotton, Marchioness of Dorset (1487–1541) was the second wife of Thomas Grey, 2nd Marquess of Dorset, and the mother of his children, including Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Suffolk, with whom she engaged in many quarrels during his minority over money and his allowance. Her lack of generosity to Henry shocked her peers as unmotherly, and inappropriate 

behaviour

 toward a high-ranking nobleman, relative[1] of King Henry VIII of England. In 1534, she was compelled to answer to the charges that she was an "unnatural mother".[2]

On 10 September 1533, she stood as one of the godmothers of Princess Elizabeth, who would later rule as Queen Elizabeth I of England.

She was the subject of two portraits by Hans Holbein the Younger.

One of her many grandchildren was Lady Jane Grey.

Family:

Margaret was born in 1487, the daughter of Sir Robert Wotton of Boughton Malherbe, Kent, and Anne Belknap, daughter of Henry Belknap esquire,[3] and sister of Sir Edward Belknap,[citation needed] Two of her brothers held important positions in the government. Sir Edward Wotton was Treasurer of Calais, and Nicholas Wotton was a diplomat who arranged the marriage of Henry VIII to Anne of Cleves in 1539.

Marriages and issue:

In 1505, Margaret married her first husband, William Medley, esquire, by whom she had one son, George (died 1562). In 1509, sometime after the death of her husband in February of that year, she married as his second wife, Thomas Grey, 2nd Marquess of Dorset, the eldest son of Thomas Grey, 1st Marquess of Dorset by Cecily Bonville, Baroness Harington and Bonville. She was styled Marchioness of Dorset upon her marriage.

By her second husband she had four sons and four daughters:[4]

Elizabeth Grey (1510–1564), who married firstly Thomas Audley, 1st Baron Audley of Walden by whom she had two daughters, including Margaret Audley, Duchess of Norfolk; she married secondly, George Norton.[citation needed]

Katherine Grey (1512 – 1 May 1532), who married Henry 

Fitzalan

, 19th Earl of Arundel, by whom she had issue.[citation needed]

Anne Grey (d.1548),[5] who married Sir Henry Willoughby (slain 27 August 1549 during 

Kett's

 Rebellion) of Wollaton, Nottinghamshire, by whom she had two sons, Thomas (d.1559) and Sir Francis, and a daughter, Margaret.[6]

Henry Grey, 1st Duke of Suffolk (12 January 1517 – 23 February 1554), who married Lady Frances Brandon, by whom he had three daughters, including Lady Jane Grey, and Lady Catherine Grey. Executed for treason, together with his eldest daughter, Lady Jane Grey, and younger brother, Thomas, for having participated in Thomas Wyatt's rebellion in 1554.

Lord John Grey (1523 – 19 November 1569)[citation needed]

Lord Thomas Grey (1526 – after 1554), who was executed together with his brother, Henry, and niece, Jane, for having participated in Thomas Wyatt's rebellion in 1554.[citation needed]

Leonard Grey.[citation needed]

Mary Grey.[citation needed]

Margaret and her husband were part of the group who accompanied Henry VIII's sister, Princess Mary, to France in the autumn of 1514, for the latter's wedding to King Louis XII of France.

In October 1530, her husband died and she was given custody of all his property during their eldest son, Henry's minority.[7]

On 10 September 1533 at Greenwich Palace, Margaret stood as one of the two godmothers of Princess Elizabeth, daughter of Henry VIII and Anne Boleyn, who would later rule as Queen Elizabeth I of England.[8] Three months earlier, on 1 June, Margaret had ridden in Anne Boleyn's coronation procession from the Tower of London to Westminster Abbey.

She was the subject of two portraits by Hans Holbein the Younger.

Quarrels with her son:

Margaret first began a long series of quarrels with her son, who had succeeded to the Marquisate of Dorset in 1530, when he was forced to pay a fine of £4000 for breach of contract after he had renounced his 

bethrothal

 to Katherine 

Fitzalan

, daughter of the Earl of Arundel. As a result, she tried to restrict his allowance throughout his minority which caused much consternation from her peers, who labelled her actions "unmotherly", and inappropriate 

behaviour

 towards a nobleman closely related to the King.[9] Margaret only agreed to Henry's marriage with Lady Frances Brandon, niece of the King, on the condition that her father, Charles Brandon, 1st Duke of Suffolk would support the couple until her son reached his majority.

In 1534, she felt compelled to answer charges that she was "an unnatural mother". As a result, she offered to contribute to her son's advancement "as my small power is and shall be".[10]

Several years later when he came of age, Henry brought his quarrel with his mother before the Kings' Council, where she belatedly admitted that her son's allowance was not "meet or sufficient to maintain his estate", and she offered to increase it. Henry was not appeased, therefore she moved out of the Grey family seat at Bradgate House; however, Henry would not let her remove her personal property, so she wrote a letter to Thomas Cromwell, pleading with him to order her son to release her goods.[11]

Margaret died in 1541 at the age of 54

The Battle of Flodden

Sir Adam 

Mure

 – of Caldwell   GXL4-M9Y

1454 – 1513        chart #657.04

by Ben Johnson

historic-uk.com/HistoryUK/HistoryofScotland/The-Batttle-of-Flodden/

In September 1513, the largest battle (in number of troops) between England and Scotland took place. The battle took place in Northumberland, just outside the village of Branxton hence the alternative name for the battle, the Battle of Branxton. Prior to the battle, the Scots were based at Flodden Edge, which is how the battle became known as the Battle of Flodden.

“I’ve heard the lilting, at the 

yowe

-milking,
Lassies a-lilting before dawn o’ day;
But now they are moaning on ilka green loaning;
The Flowers of the Forest are a’ 

wede

 away”.

Dool

 and 

wae

 for the order sent 

oor

 lads 

tae

 the Border!
The English for 

ance

, by guile wan the day,
The 

Flooers

 o’ the Forest, that fought aye the foremost,
The pride o’ 

oor

 land lie 

cauld

 in the clay.

I’ve heard the lilting, at the 

yowe

-milking,
Lassies a-lilting before dawn o’ day;
But now they are moaning on ilka green loaning;
The Flowers of the Forest are a’ 

wede

 away”

— Extract from “The Flowers of the Forest”, Jean Elliot, 1756

The Battle of Flodden was essentially a retaliation for King Henry VIII‘s invasion of France in May 1513. The invasion provoked the French King Louis XII to invoke the terms of the Auld Alliance, a defensive alliance between France and Scotland to deter England from invading either country, with a treaty that stipulated that if either country was invaded by England the other country would invade England in retaliation.

King Henry VIII of England (left) and King James IV of Scotland

The French King sent arms, experienced captains and money to help with the counter attack of England. In August 1513, after King Henry VIII rejected King James IV of Scotland’s ultimatum to either withdraw from France or Scotland would invade England, an estimated 60,000 Scottish troops crossed the River Tweed into England.

Henry VIII had anticipated the French using the Auld Alliance to encourage the Scottish to invade England and therefore had only drawn troops from the south of England and the Midlands to invade France. This left Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey (Lieutenant-General in the North) to command the English against the invasion from north of the border. The Earl of Surrey was a veteran of Barnet and Bosworth. His experience became invaluable as this 70 year-old man began to head north assimilating large contingents from the Northern Counties as he headed to 

Alnwick

. By the time he reached 

Alnwick

 on the 4th September 1513 he had assembled around 26,000 men.

The Earl of Surrey heard news that King James of Scotland planned to position his army at Flodden Edge on the 7th September 1513. Flodden Edge is an impressive feature rising up to a height of between 500-600 feet. On hearing the news of the Scots position, Surrey appealed to King James to fight on more level ground. But Surreys appeal fell on deaf ears and King James refused.

The day before battle, Surrey began marching his army north so that by the morning of the battle on the 9th September 1513, the English were in a position to start approaching the Scots from the north. This meant that King James’ lines of retreat across the River Tweed at Coldstream would be cut off if he remained at Flodden Edge, forcing him to march the Scots a mile from Flodden Edge to Branxton Hill, a less daunting but still uneven vantage point.

The outcome of The Battle of Flodden was mainly due to the choice of weapons used. The Scots had advanced in the continental style of the time. This meant a series of massed pike formations. The Scottish armies’ great advantage of using high ground became its downfall as the hilly terrain and ground became slippery underfoot, slowing down the advances and attacks. Unfortunately, the pike is most effective in battles of movement which The Battle of Flodden was not.

-295275571500

The English chose a more familiar weapon, the bill (shown on the right). This 

favoured

 the terrain and the flow of the battle, proving to have the stopping power of a spear and the power of an axe.

Surreys style of using the medieval 

favourites

 of the bill and bow against the more Renaissance style of the Scottish with their French pikes proved superior and Flodden became known as the victory of bill over pike!

The English Army led by the Earl of Surrey lost around 1,500 men at the Battle of Flodden but had no real lasting effect on English history. The 70-year old Earl of Surrey gained his 

fathers

 title of Duke of Norfolk and went on to live on into his 80’s!

The repercussions of the Battle of Flodden were much greater for the Scots. Most of the accounts on how many Scottish lives were lost at Flodden conflict, but it is thought to be between 10,000 to 17,000 men. This included a large proportion of the nobility and more tragically its King. King James IV of Scotland’s death meant a minor noble ascended the throne (an unfortunately familiar tale in Scottish history) causing a new era of political instability for the Scottish nation.

The Scottish still remember the Battle of Flodden today with the haunting ballad and pipe tune “The Flowers of the Forest”. Written 300 years after Flodden, the lyrics are written to commemorate the fallen Scots.

Sir Thomas Boleyn – 1st Earl of 

Whiltshire

L13Z-354        chart #784.02

1477 – 1539

4049395169545000

Thomas Boleyn, 1st Earl of Wiltshire, 1st Earl of Ormond,[2] 1st Viscount Rochford KG, KB (c. 1477 – 12 March 1539), of 

Hever

 Castle in Kent, was an English diplomat and politician who was the father of Anne Boleyn, Queen Consort and the second wife of King Henry VIII, and was thus the maternal grandfather of Queen Elizabeth I of England. 

Origins 

4638675443801500He was born in about 1477 at 

Blickling

 Hall, Norfolk, the son of Sir William Boleyn (1451-1505) of 

Blickling

 (purchased by Sir William's father Sir Geoffrey Boleyn, a wealthy mercer[4]) by his wife Lady Margaret Butler (1454–1539), a daughter and co-heiress of Thomas Butler, 7th Earl of Ormond. 

Marriage and issue 

At some time before 1499 he married Lady Elizabeth Howard, eldest daughter of Thomas Howard, 2nd Duke of Norfolk by his wife Elizabeth Tilney. Five children are attested, only three of whom survived childhood: 

Mary Boleyn (c. 1499 – 19 July 1543); Mary Carey (1520–1528); Mary Stafford (1534–1543); Mary's second husband, William Stafford, was knighted in 1545 – two years after his wife's death in 1543. 

2- Thomas Boleyn the younger (c. 1500 – ) [5] 

3- Anne Boleyn (c. 1501/1507 – 19 May 1536); later Marquess of Pembroke (1532– 1536); later Queen Consort of England (1533–1536) 

4- Henry Boleyn (c. 1502/03 – ) 

5- George Boleyn (c. 1504 – 17 May 1536); later 2nd Viscount Rochford (1529–1536) by courtesy 

Diplomatic career 

In 1503 Boleyn helped to escort Margaret Tudor north for her marriage to King James IV of Scotland. He was created a Knight of the Bath at the coronation of Henry VIII in 1509. 

His appointment as ambassador to the Low Countries brought him into contact with the regent Archduchess Margaret of Austria. Like Thomas, Margaret of Austria spoke French and Latin and they got along well enough for her to accept his daughter, Anne, as a maid of honor. 

Through his ability and the connections of his extended family, Thomas Boleyn became one of Henry VIII's leading diplomats. Known appointments and missions included: 

1511 and 1517: Sheriff of Kent 

1512: One of a party of three envoys to the Netherlands. 

1518–1521 : ambassador to France, where he was involved in arrangements for the "Field of Cloth of Gold" meeting between Henry and the new French King Francis I in 1520. 

1521 and 1523 : Envoy to Holy Roman Emperor Charles V. 

1527: One of a large envoy to France 

1529: Envoy to a meeting of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V and Pope Clement VII, to seek support for the marriage annulment of Henry VIII and Catherine of Aragon. This was followed by another envoy to France. 

Titles obtained 

Boleyn was invested as a Knight of the Garter in 1523. 

Boleyn's claim to his other titles derived from his mother, Lady Margaret Butler who was the younger daughter and co-heiress of Thomas Butler, 7th Earl of Ormond. Thomas Butler, as an Irish peer, should only have sat in the Parliament of Ireland. However, as a personal friend of Henry VII he was summoned to the English parliament in November 1488 as "Thomas Ormond de Rochford, 

chevaler

". At this time, he was already 8th Earl of Carrick and 7th Earl of Ormond. 

In English law, matrilineal descent is not considered valid for earldoms, and in Brehon law, then largely still in use in Ireland, new leaders were chosen by election. These customs were, in Boleyn's case, outweighed by a more important consideration – he was the father of two daughters. Henry VIII had affairs first with Boleyn's elder daughter Mary, then with his younger daughter, Anne. Boleyn's ambition was so considerable that unsubstantiated rumors had it that he allowed his wife to have an affair with the king, but those 

rumours

 were intended to steer the king away from marrying Anne, and even suggested that she was his own daughter.[13] When it was claimed that Henry had had an affair with both Anne's sister and mother, the king replied to the rumors, "Never with the mother." 

In 1525, Henry VIII became 

enamoured

 of Anne and began pursuing her. Her father was elevated to the peerage as Viscount Rochford on 18 June 1525.[15] The title referred to the "barony" of Rochford supposedly created in 1488 for his grandfather. The title had fallen into abeyance as Ormond had died without any male heir in 1515. Boleyn is often thought of as a power hungry, ambitious and scheming man who sacrificed his daughters for personal gain, but his biographer, Dr Lauren Mackay, has successfully argued that he enjoyed a highly successful career as an ambassador and courtier years before his daughters caught the King's eye. As Henry's passion for Anne intensified, so did her father's titles, though these rewards were not solely due to Anne but also Boleyn's own merit.[16] Henry pressured the main claimant to the earldom of Ormond, Piers Butler, to renounce all his claims to the titles in 1529. Piers Butler was rewarded by being created Earl of 

Ossory

 five days later. 

Boleyn's claims to the Earldom of Wiltshire also depended upon his Irish relatives. This time, he had to go back to his maternal great-grandfather, James Butler, 4th Earl of Ormond, to establish a claim. While James Butler was indeed the 1st Earl of Wiltshire (of the third creation), on 1 May 1461 he lost his titles and his life when he was executed by the victorious Yorkists. The title was subsequently revived (in fourth and fifth creations) and bestowed on people unrelated to the Butlers of Ormond. This did not prevent the creation of the earldom for the 6th time. On 8 December 1529 Thomas Boleyn, Viscount Rochford, was created Earl of Wiltshire and Earl of Ormond. 

Also on 8 December 1529, the Earl of Wiltshire's only surviving son, George, was granted the courtesy title of Viscount Rochford. His title of Viscount, although initially a courtesy title, ceased to be a mere courtesy title sometime before 13 July 1530. On 17 May 1536, Lord Rochford was executed for treason, and all his titles were forfeited. His widow, Jane, Viscountess Rochford, however, continued to use the title after her husband's death. Lady Rochford was herself attainted for treason and beheaded at Tower Green (not Tower Hill) within the Tower of London on 13 February 1542 with Henry VIII's fifth wife, Queen Katherine Howard. 

Boleyn was appointed Lord Privy Seal in 1530. In 1532, his daughter Anne was granted a peerage, being created Marquess of Pembroke in her own right, before marrying Henry the following year and becoming queen consort. Boleyn acquiesced in Anne's judicial execution and that of her brother Lord Rochford when Henry discarded her in 

favour

 of his third wife, Queen Jane Seymour. At this point Boleyn was replaced as Lord Privy Seal and left in disgrace until his death a few years later. He suffered a final indignity when the claims of Piers Butler to the Earldom of Ormond were recognized and he again became Earl of Ormond from 22 January 1538. There were two earls of Ormond in the Kingdom until his death on 12 March 1539. 

Death and burial 

He died at 

Hever

 Castle on 12 March 1539 and was buried in St. Peter's Church, 

Hever

, where survives his elaborate monumental brass. He is depicted dressed in full robes wearing the insignia of a Knight of the Garter, with the Badge on his left breast and the Garter around his left knee. His head rests on a helm surmounted by a crest of a falcon displayed (his daughter's heraldic badge) and his feet rest on a griffin. The inscription reads: Here lieth Sir Thomas Bullen, Knight of the Order of the Garter, Erle of 

Wilscher

 and Erle or 

Ormunde

, which 

decessed

 the 12th 

dai

 of Marche in the 

iere

 of our Lorde 1538. 

[Source - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Boleyn,_1st_Earl_of_Wiltshire]

Elizabeth Howard - Countess of 

Whiltshire

9VMZ=3KK        chart #784.03

43338751481455001480-1538

History of Elizabeth Howard (1480-1538)

Elizabeth Boleyn, Countess of Wiltshire (née Lady Elizabeth Howard; c. 1480 – 3 April 1538) was an English noblewoman, noted for being the mother of Anne Boleyn and as such the maternal grandmother of Elizabeth I of England. The eldest daughter of Thomas Howard, 2nd Duke of Norfolk and his first wife Elizabeth Tilney, she married Thomas Boleyn sometime in the later 15th century. Elizabeth became Viscountess Rochford in 1525 when her husband was elevated to the peerage, subsequently becoming Countess of Ormond in 1527 and Countess of Wiltshire in 1529.

Family and early life

Elizabeth was born c. 1480 into the wealthy and influential Howard family, as the eldest of the two daughters of Thomas Howard, 2nd Duke of Norfolk and his first wife Elizabeth Tilney. Her paternal grandfather, John Howard, 1st Duke of Norfolk, was created Duke of Norfolk in 1483 following the death of John de Mowbray, 4th Duke of Norfolk, with no legitimate male heirs.

Her family managed to survive the fall of their patron, King Richard III, who was killed at Bosworth in 1485 and supplanted by the victor, King Henry VII, when she was about five years old. Elizabeth became a part of the royal court as a young girl.

Marriage and lady-in-waiting for the royal court

It was while she was at court, that she wed Thomas Boleyn, an ambitious young courtier, sometime before 1500, probably in 1498. According to Thomas, his wife was pregnant many times in the next few years but only three children lived to adulthood. The three children were:

1- Mary Boleyn, mistress of Henry VIII of England (c. 1499 – 19 July 1543).

2- Anne Boleyn, Queen consort of Henry VIII of England (c. 1500/1501 – 19 May 1536)

3- George Boleyn, Viscount Rochford (c. 1503 – 17 May 1536).

Throughout this time, Elizabeth was a lady-in-waiting at the royal court; first to Elizabeth of York, and then to Catherine of Aragon. Based on later gossip, Elizabeth Boleyn must have been a highly attractive woman. 

Rumours

 circulated when Henry was involved with Anne Boleyn that Elizabeth had once been his mistress, with the suggestion even being made that Anne Boleyn might be the daughter of Henry VIII. However, despite recent attempts by one or two historians to rehabilitate this myth, it was denied by Henry and never mentioned in the dispensation he sought in order to make his union with Anne lawful. Most historians believe it is likely that this 

rumour

 began by confusing Elizabeth with Henry's more famous mistress Elizabeth Blount, or from the growing unpopularity of the Boleyn family after 1527.

1519–1536

In 1519, Elizabeth's daughters, Anne and Mary, were living in the French royal court as Ladies-in-waiting to the French Queen consort Claude. According to the papal nuncio in France fifteen years later, the French King Francis I had referred to Mary as "my English mare", and later in his life described her as "a great whore, the most infamous of all".

In the words of historian M.L. Bruce, both Thomas and Elizabeth "developed feelings of dislike" for their daughter Mary. In later years, Mary's romantic involvements would only further strain this relationship. Around 1520, the 

Boleyns

 managed to arrange Mary's marriage to William Carey, a respected and popular man at court. It was sometime after the wedding that Mary became mistress to Henry VIII (the exact dates as to when the affair started and ended are unknown), although she never held the title of "official royal mistress," as the post did not exist in England. It has long been 

rumoured

 that one or both of Mary Boleyn's children were fathered by Henry and not Carey. Some historians, such as Alison Weir, now question whether Henry Carey was fathered by the King. Few of Henry's mistresses were ever publicly 

honoured

, except Elizabeth Blount, who was mentioned in Parliament and whose son, Henry Fitzroy, was created Duke of Richmond and Somerset in an elaborate public ceremony in 1525. Henry's relationship with Mary was so discreet that within ten years, some observers were wondering if it had ever taken place.

In contrast to Mary, Elizabeth's other daughter, Anne, is thought to have had a close relationship with her mother. Elizabeth had been in charge of her children's early education, including Anne's, and she had taught her to play on various musical instruments, to sing and to dance, as well as embroidery, poetry, good manners, arithmetic, reading, writing and some French. In 1525, Henry VIII fell in love with Anne, and Elizabeth became her protective chaperone. She accompanied Anne to Court, since Anne was attempting to avoid a sexual relationship with the King. Elizabeth travelled with Anne to view York Place after the fall of the Boleyn family's great political opponent, Cardinal Thomas Wolsey – an intrigue which had given Anne her first real taste of political power. She was crowned queen four years later.

Elizabeth remained in her daughter's household throughout her time as queen consort. Tradition has it that Anne's daughter, Elizabeth I, was named after her maternal grandmother. However, it is more likely that she was named after Henry's mother, Elizabeth of York, although the possibility that she was named after both grandmothers cannot be ruled out.

Elizabeth Boleyn sided with the rest of the family when her eldest daughter, Mary, was banished in 1535 for eloping with a commoner, William Stafford. Mary had initially expected her sister's support (Anne had been Mary's only confidante within the Boleyn family since 1529), but Anne was furious at the breach of etiquette and refused to receive her.

Only a year later, the family was overtaken by a greater scandal. Elizabeth's younger daughter, Anne, and her only living son, George, were executed on charges of treason, adultery, and incest. Anne's two chief biographers, Eric Ives and Retha 

Warnicke

, both concluded that these charges were fabricated. They also agree that the King wanted to marry Jane Seymour. Beyond this obvious fact, the sequence of events is unclear and historians are divided about whether the key motivation for Anne's downfall was her husband's hatred of her or her political ambitions. Despite the claims of several recent novels, academic historians agree that Anne was innocent and faithful to her husband. Nonetheless, the judges obeyed the King, condemning Anne, George Boleyn and four others to death. Elizabeth's husband Thomas Boleyn and brother Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk provided no help to the condemned. The accused men were beheaded by the axe on 17 May 1536 and Anne was executed by a French swordsman two days later.

Later life and death

Following the annihilation of the family's ambitions, Elizabeth retired to the countryside. She died only two years after her two younger children and her husband died the following year. Elizabeth is buried in the Howard family chapel at St. Mary's Church, Lambeth. The church, decommissioned in 1972, is now the Garden Museum.

[Source - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elizabeth_Boleyn,_Countess_of_Wiltshire]

Thomas Howard – 2nd Duke of Norfolk

4333875132461000LCC6-7J3     chart #784.06

1480-1538

1306830208597500

2264410414210500Thomas Howard, 2nd Duke of Norfolk, KG, PC, Earl Marshal (1443 – 21 May 1524), styled Earl of Surrey from 1483 to 1485 and again from 1489 to 1514, was the only son of John Howard, 1st Duke of Norfolk, by his first wife, Katherine 

Moleyns

. The Duke was the grandfather of both Queen Anne Boleyn and Queen Catherine Howard and the great grandfather of Queen Elizabeth I. He served four monarchs as a soldier and statesman. 

35775907000240004352925399923000Thomas Howard, 2nd Duke of Norfolk, was born in 1443 at Stoke-by-Nayland, Suffolk, the only son of John Howard, 1st Duke of Norfolk, by his first wife, Katherine, the daughter of William 

Moleyns

 (d. 8 June 1425) and his wife Margery.[1] He was educated at Thetford Grammar School.[2] Service under Edward 

IVWhile

 a youth he entered the service of King Edward IV as a henchman. Howard took the King's side when war broke out in 1469 with the Earl of Warwick, and took sanctuary at Colchester when the King fled to Holland in 1470. Howard rejoined the royal forces at Edward's return to England in 1471, and was severely wounded at the Battle of Barnet on 14 April 1471.[2] 

He was appointed an esquire of the body in 1473. On 14 January 1478 he was knighted by Edward IV at the marriage of the King's second son, the young Duke of York, and Lady Anne Mowbray (d.1483).[3] 

Service under Richard III 

After the death of Edward IV on 9 April 1483, Thomas Howard and his father John supported Richard III's usurpation of the throne. Thomas bore the Sword of State at Richard's coronation, and served as steward at the coronation banquet. Both Thomas and his father were granted lands by the new King, and Thomas was also granted an annuity of £1000. On 28 June 1483, John Howard was created Duke of Norfolk, while Thomas was created Earl of Surrey. Surrey was also sworn of the Privy Council and invested with the Order of the Garter. In the autumn of that year Norfolk and Surrey suppressed a rebellion against the King by the Duke of Buckingham. Both Howards remained close to King Richard throughout his two-year reign, and fought for him at the Battle of Bosworth in 1485, where Surrey was wounded and taken prisoner, and his father killed. Surrey was attainted in the first Parliament of the new King, Henry VII, stripped of his lands, and committed to the Tower of London, where he spent the next three years. 

Service under Henry VII 

Howard was offered an opportunity to escape during the rebellion of the Earl of Lincoln in 1487, but refused, perhaps convincing Henry VII of his loyalty. In May 1489 Henry restored him to the earldom of Surrey, although most of his lands were withheld, and sent him to quell a rebellion in Yorkshire. Surrey remained in the north as the King's lieutenant until 1499. In 1499 he was recalled to court, and accompanied the King on a state visit to France in the following year. In 1501 he was again appointed a member of the Council, and on 16 June of that year was made Lord High Treasurer. Surrey, Bishop Richard Foxe, the Lord Privy Seal, and Archbishop William 

Warham

, the Lord Chancellor, became the King's 'executive triumvirate'. He was entrusted with a number of diplomatic missions. In 1501 he was involved in the negotiations for Catherine of Aragon's marriage to Arthur, Prince of Wales, and in 1503 conducted Margaret Tudor to Scotland for her wedding to King James IV. 

Service under Henry VIII 

Surrey was an executor of the will of King Henry VII when the King died on 21 April 1509, and played a prominent role in the coronation of King Henry VIII, in which he served as Earl Marshal. He challenged Thomas Wolsey in an effort to become the new King's first minister, but eventually accepted Wolsey's supremacy. Surrey expected to lead the 1513 expedition to France, but was left behind when the King departed for Calais on 30 June 1513. Shortly thereafter James IV launched an invasion, and Surrey, with the aid of other noblemen and his sons Thomas and Edmund, crushed James's much larger force near 

BranxThomas

 

John Stewart – of 

Balveny

, 1st Earl of 

Atholl

LZJ2-RSB     chart #876.06

45815251543685001440-1512

2505075182753000

John Stewart, 1st Earl of 

Atholl

 (c. 1440 – 15 September 1512), also known as Sir John Stewart of 

Balveny

, was a Scottish nobleman and ambassador to England (in 1484). 

He was the oldest child of Joan Beaufort, widow of James I of Scotland, and her second husband Sir James Stewart, the Black Knight of 

Lorn

. 

16427454314825004648200417893500He was created Earl of 

Atholl

 in around 1457, the first earl of the eighth creation of the title. He is believed to have had a hand in suppressing the rebellion of John Macdonald, 11th Earl of Ross, the last of the Lords of the Isles. According to legend, the Earl of 

Atholl

 had whisky, honey and oats added to Macdonald's water well, which so entranced or intoxicated him that Macdonald was easily captured. The mixture became a drink named 

Atholl

 Brose. 

Stewart was buried in Dunkeld Cathedral in 

Perthshire

. 

Marriage and children

John Stewart married twice and had several children. However, the exact number, names and the attribution of his children to their mothers is unclear. 

He married firstly, in 1459–1460, Margaret Douglas, Fair Maid of Galloway, daughter of Archibald Douglas, 5th Earl of Douglas. Margaret had been married already to the 8th Earl and possibly the 9th Earl of Douglas. She died between 1473 and 1475. They had three daughters: 

Janet Stewart, married Alexander Gordon, 3rd Earl of Huntly. 

Elizabeth Stewart, married Andrew Gray, 2nd Lord Gray. 

Christian, married Neil Stewart of Garth. 

He married secondly, before April 1475, Eleanor Sinclair (d. 21 March 1518), daughter of William Sinclair, 3rd Earl of Orkney. They had two sons and nine daughters: 

John Stewart, 2nd Earl of 

Atholl

, living 1520, and died before 1522, who married 

Janet Campbell (died about Candlemas 1545/6), daughter of Archibald Campbell, 2nd Earl of 

Arygll

. 

Andrew Stewart, Bishop of 

Caithness

. 

Jean (or Janet) Stewart, married by contract dated 31 August 1507, James 

Arbuthnott

 of 

Arbuthnott

. He had a crown charter of the feudal barony of 

Arbuthnott

 29 January 1507. He left a testament dated 7 March 1521, and died before 13 March 1521. 

Katherine Stewart, married Sir John Forbes, 6th Lord Forbes. 

Elizabeth/Elspeth Stewart, married Sir Robert Innes 2nd of 

Innermarky

. 

Marjory Stewart, married Sir Colin Campbell, of 

Glenorchy

. 

Margaret Stewart, married Sir William Murray, of Castleton who was killed at Battle of Flodden, Ancestor of the Dukes of 

Atholl

 

Elizabeth Stewart, married Alexander Robertson, of 

Strowan

. 

Elizabeth (or Isabel) Stewart, married John Stewart, 3rd Earl of Lennox 

Jean Stewart, married Robert Gordon, Knt., of 

Pitlurg

. 

Margaret Stewart, married Robert Robertson younger, of 

Strowan

. 

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Stewart,_1st_Earl_of_Atholl

Antonio 

Basssano

 – Italian musician – Venice to England to the 

the

 household of Henry VIII

LVLY-BT1      1511-1574     chart #519.12 and #1189.01

4371975179578000

2266950184721500

Italian 

musicianVenice

 to England to the household of Henry VIII 

Anthony Bassano was a 16th century Italian musician.. 

Bassano, born in Bassano del Grappa, Italy, was one of six sons of Jeronimo Bassano (Anthony, 

Jacomo

, 

Alvise

, Jasper, John and Baptista) who moved from Venice to England to the household of Henry VIII to serve the court, probably in 1540. Of his ten children, the five sons (Mark Anthony, Arthur, Edward, Andrea and Jeronimo) all served as musicians to the court of Henry VIII, and a daughter (

Lucreece

 Bassano) married Nicholas Lanier the Elder, grandfather of the artist-musician Nicholas Lanier.. 

The talent of the six sons of Jeronimo as instrumentalists and makers of wind instruments, was recognized not only in Venice but also in London. In the years 1535-1540, Henry VIII decided to improve the musical staff at his court, and he charged his Venetian agent, Edmond 

Harvel

, to recruit the Bassano brothers. The 

Bassanos

 demanded substantial guarantees, for in order to leave Venice, they were required to obtain the authorization of the Doge and would lose their employment there.. 

The negotiations were successful, and at the end of 1539, 

Alvise

, John, Baptista, and Jasper, along with their respective families, made a definitive departure from Venice for England, rejoining Anthony there. (

Jacomo

 had returned to Italy on the death of his father, Jeronimo, probably to take over his business as instrument maker). The 

Bassanos

 musicians, jurists, and merchants became, through a few solid alliances, one of the more respectable families of the English "gentry," endowed with a family crest and several properties.. 

Peter Bassano (born London 1945) the conductor and Music Director of Oxford University Sinfonietta is a direct descendant of Anthony Bassano. Peter was like a number of his Tudor forbears a trombonist. A member of the 

Philharmonia

 Orchestra and former professor and Head of Brass at the Royal College of Music.

Col. Edmond Scarborough  

L13Y-CG8     1617-1671     chart #536.14 and #1222.01

4133850154749500

211455042341800020383501709420004162425353885500Col. Edmond Scarborough, the second son of Captain Edmond and Hannah Butler came to America with his father. He married Mary Littleton, [sic; see Mary] daughter of Col. Nathaniel Littleton, in England, and patented vast tracts of land in Virginia. (Mary Scarborough did not come over with her husband, but arrived in 1640, brought over by her husband, Edmond Scarborough, of 

Accomac

, according to Greer.) He held the highest offices within the gift of the people, and the Crown, and was the most distinguished member of the family, as well as the most spectacular. There are many traditions concerning him and his high handed actions in Colonial Virginia, some of which were called unscrupulous. He was called "Conjurer" by the Indians, who hated and feared him, and was anathema to the Puritans and Quakers, whom he considered his special enemies.

The 

Scarboroughs

 were the largest land owners on the Eastern Shore, and with their powerful connections, exercised almost feudal powers in the Colony. Though there were many clashes with Colonial authorities, and sometimes with the mother country, Col. Edmond Scarborough was able to avoid serious punishment because of the influence of his brother, Sir Charles Scarborough, Court Physician at the Court of St. James. When under fire in Virginia, he conveniently removed temporarily to Maryland, where he had large holdings, or to New England, where his ships were constantly in port. (Owned a ship called Mayflower but not Pilgrim's Mayflower.) As Surveyor-General, Col. Scarborough fixed boundary lines that suited his convenience, and was able to extend the southern boundary of 

Accomac

 County in order to include his home, which normally would lie in Northampton County, if the two counties were equally divided. He still owned land in Northampton, after the division of the two counties, and was the King's Collector of Quit Rents, among his other official duties under the Crown.

When Col. Edmond Scarborough surveyed and marked the boundary between Maryland and Virginia, Governor Calvert, of Maryland, was vigorous in his protest. A new survey was finally made, called the Calvert-Scarborough Line, ratified by the Legislatures of the two states, and recognized in 1688 as the boundary line.

Col. Edmond Scarborough was indeed a versatile man. He not only managed his large plantations, with his many slaves and servants, and had heavy official duties with his various Colonial offices, but he was interested in many of the colony's early manufacturing ventures. He had the exclusive right to make salt, had one of the earliest shoe factories, and malt plants, and carried on an extensive shipping business. He was also an able lawyer, and a power in the Courts. Though an ardent Royalist, it has been said that would undoubtedly have joined Bacon in his Rebellion, as his son, Col. Charles Scarborough, did had he lived a few years longer, for he was an avowed enemy of Governor Berkeley, with whom he had many clashes. Col. Charles Scarborough was joined in his allegiance to Bacon by his cousin, William Scarborough, though his brother, Captain Edmond Scarborough, remained loyal to Governor Berkeley. After the death of Bacon, and the collapse of the rebellion, Col. Charles Scarborough escaped with only a fine, while his cousin, William Scarborough, was sentenced to death and his property confiscated, March 16, 1677. The defection of Col. Charles Scarborough was evidently forgiven, for in 1692 he was the Naval Officer and Collector for the Eastern Shore, under Governor Andros, and served until 1698. His father, Col. Edmond Scarborough, had held this office during his lifetime, and the son of Col. Charles, Henry Scarborough, succeeded his father in 1699.

This fiery Col. Edmond Scarborough, with all of his faults was a remarkable man of his day, for in spite of his unbridled violence, and will, his loyalty to Virginia and her institutions could not be questioned. Among his many offices were the following: Member of the House of Burgesses, 1642-1671; Speaker of the House of Burgesses, 1645; Justice of Northampton County; Sheriff in 1666; Surveyor General for Virginia, 1665-1671, and numerous offices in the Church. He died circa 1673 and is probably buried on his estate on 

Occahannock

 Creek, where his home, called Hedrick Cottage, was still standing a few years ago. The neck of land between 

Craddocks

 Creek, and 

Occahannock

 Creek was called Scarborough's Neck.

Found on this 

websight

- http://www.esva.net/ghotes/scarb/scarb.htm

